1
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MANUAL
FOR HEALTH WORKERS
2024

2

3


4

i


ii

iii


iv

v


vi

vii


viii


ixWe would like to extend heartfelt gratitude to Ms. Punya Salila Srivastava, Secretary 
(Health) for her leadership and support provided in the process of development of Routine 
Immunization (RI) Manual for Health Workers 2024. Special thanks to Ms. Aradhana Patnaik 
(Additional Secretary & Mission Director -NHM) for her overall guidance for drafting this 
essential document for Health Workers and Ms. Meera Srivastava, Joint Secretary (RCH) 
for her contribution in providing valuable inputs and unwavering support to this initiative 
are well acknowledged.
We deeply express sincere gratitude and thankfulness for the exceptional technical expertise, 
guidance, support, and meticulous review provided under the stewardship of Dr. Pawan 
Kumar, Additional Commissioner (UIP) throughout the development process of the revised 
Routine Immunization Manual for Health Workers 2024. His vision for a high standard 
technical manual is deeply appreciated, which would significantly improve the technical 
skills of Health Workers to further strengthen Universal Immunization Programme in India.
We express appreciations for the commitment and valuable contributions of Dr. Ashish B 
Chakraborty, (Public Health Specialist, MoHFW), Dr. Satishchandra Donkatti (Technical 
Officer, WHO) and Ms. Visali Sekar (Technical officer, MoHFW) in conceptualization, content 
development & editing of this revised RI Manual for Health Workers 2024.
Additionally, We express our sincere thanks for providing guidance by Dr. Veena Dhawan (Ex- 
Additional Commissioner (UIP), Dr. Suhas Dhandore (Ex-Public Health Specialist, MoHFW) 
and Dr. Tigran Avagyan (Team Leader-NPSN, WHO).
List of Contributors: Immunization Division (MoHFW)
Immunization Division (MoHFW)
1. Dr. Pawan Kumar
2. Dr. Ashish B Chakraborty
3. Ms. Visali Sekar
4. Dr. Kapil Singh
5. Dr. Sheen Job
6. Dr. Rajat Ranjan
7. Dr. Shipra Verma
8. Mr. Praveen Rajouria
9. Mr. Govind Singh
10. Mr. Nishant Shukla
11. Mr. Naushad Ansari
12. Mr. Satya Prakash
World Health Organization (WHO)
1. Dr. Tigran Avagyan
2. Dr. Satishchandra Donkatti
3. Dr. Vishesh KumarAcknowledgments

x4. Dr. Puneet Mishra
5. Dr. Ashutosh Aggarwal
6. Dr. Puttaraju A K
7. Dr. Ratnesh Murugan
8. Dr. Arun Kumar
9. Dr. Subramanya B P
10. Dr. P K Roy
11. Dr. Vineet Goyal
12. Dr. Mohammad Samiuddin
13. Dr. Rakesh Vishwakarma
14. Dr Preeti Nigam
15. Dr Nitasha Kaur (Former Urban Focal Person)
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
1. Dr. Mainak Chatterjee
2. Dr. Ashish Chauhan
3. Dr. Yashika Negi
4. Ms. Joshila Pallapati
5. Ms. Sukhpal Kaur Marwa
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
1. Mr. Abhimanyu Saxena
2. Dr. Pankaj Somani
Immunization Technical Support Unit (ITSU)
1. Dr. Pritu Dhalaria
2. Dr. Jaishri Jethwaney
3. Dr. Deepak Polpakara
4. Dr. Mona Chopra
5. Dr. Disha Aggarwal (Former Programme Lead)
6. Mr. Satish (Former Programme Communication Officer)
John Snow India Private Limited (JSI)
1. Dr. Pradeep Haldar
2. Dr. G K Soni
3. Dr. Parthasarathy Ganguli (Former Programme Lead)
4. Dr. Arup Deb Roy
5. Dr. Anshul Shukla
JHPIEGO
1. Dr. Prem Singh
National Cold Chain and Vaccine Management Resource Centre (NCCVMRC)
1. Mr. Shashi Kant Ray
2. Mr. Rakesh Kumar
We express sincere acknowledgment for the consolidated efforts of Immunization Division 
Team (MoHFW) and Development Partners from WHO, UNICEF, UNDP, ITSU, JSI, JHPIEGO, 
NCCVMRC in the entire process of manual development which is highly appreciated.

xiTable of contents
Unit Topic Page
Messages i
Acknowledgements ix
Table of contents xi
Table of annexures xiii
Acronyms xv
Unit-1 Introduction 1
Unit-2 Roles and responsibilities of health workers in immunization 9
Unit-3 National Immunization Schedule 19
Unit-4 Diseases prevented by vaccination 29
Unit-5 Routine Immunization Microplanning 37
Unit-6 Cold-chain and vaccine management 85
Unit-7 Safe injection practices and Waste disposal 105
Unit-8 Conducting the routine immunization session 115
Unit-9 Adverse events following immunization (AEFI) 135
Unit-10 Records, reports and using data for action 155
Unit-11 Communication 167
Unit-12 Surveillance of vaccine preventable diseases 177
Unit-13 U-WIN-- Digital Platform for Data Recording & Reporting 183
Frequently asked questions 191
References 203
Annexures 207

xii

xiiiTable of annexures
1. National Immunization schedule beneficiary vaccine chart 209
2. Routine Immunization microplanning formats - Head count survey formats,  
Subcenter/ANM area microplan formats, PHC/ UPHC microplan formats 210
3. Routine Immunization head count survey validation format  233
4. Checklists for Preventive Maintenance of cold-chain equipment 234
5. Formats for Vaccine stock and distribution registers 236
6. Flow chart of Initial management of Anaphylaxis by ANM 239
7. Formats used during Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI)  
Case Reporting Form (CRF) and AEFI register 240
8. Routine Immunization Tally sheet 244
9. Routine Immunization Supervision and monitoring formats 245
10. HRA enlistment and validation formats 248
11. Agenda for two days RI training for Health workers 249

xiv

xvAcronyms
ABDM  Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
AD Auto Disable Syringe
AEFI  Adverse Events Following Immunization
AES  Acute Encephalitis Syndrome
AFP  Acute Flaccid Paralysis
AIDS  Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
ANC  Ante-Natal Care
ANM  Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ASHA  Accredited Social Health Activist
AVD  Alternate Vaccine Delivery
AWC  Anganwadi Centre
AWW  Anganwadi Worker
BCG  Bacillus Calmette-Guerin
bOPV  Bivalent Oral Polio Vaccine
CBO  Community Based Organization
CBWTF  Common Biomedical Waste Treatment Facility
CHC  Community Health Centre
CRS  Congenital Rubella Syndrome
CPCB  Central Pollution Control Board
DF Deep Freezer
DIO  District Immunization Officer
DPT  Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus
DTF-I  District Task Force – Immunization
EDD  Expected Date of Delivery
EEFO  Early Expiry First Out
e-VIN  Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network
FAQs  Frequently Asked Questions
fIPV  Fractional Inactivated Polio Vaccine
FLW  Front Line Worker
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practices
Hep B  Hepatitis B
HHE  Hypotonic, Hypo responsive Episode
Hib  Haemophilus influenzae type b
HIV  Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HMIS  Health Management Information System
HRA  High Risk Area
H-t-H  House to House
HW Health Worker
ICDS  Integrated Child Development Services
IEC Information, Education, Communication
ILR Ice Lined Refrigerator
IM Intra Muscular
IPC Inter Personal Communication

xviIPV Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine
JE Japanese Encephalitis
LGD  Local Government Directory
LHV  Lady Health Visitor
LMP  Last Menstrual Period
LS Lady Supervisor
LW Link Worker
MCH  Maternal and Child Health
MCP  Mother and Child Protection
MCTS  Mother and Child Tracking System
MO Medical Officer
MOIC  Medical Officer In-Charge
MR Measles Rubella
NGO  Non-Government Organization
NIN  National Institute of Nutrition
NIS  National Immunization Schedule
NPSN  National Public Health Support Network
OPV  Oral Polio Vaccine
OVP  Open Vial Policy
Penta  Pentavalent
PCV  Pneumococcal Vaccine
PHC  Primary Health Centre
PIP Project Implementation Plan
PRI  Panchayat Raj Institution
PW Pregnant Women
RCH  Reproductive and Child Health
RI Routine Immunization
RVV  Rotavirus Vaccine
SC Sub Centre
SHG  Self Help Group
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure
Td Tetanus Diphtheria Toxoid
UHC  Urban Health Centre
UIP  Universal Immunization Programme
ULB  Urban Local Body
VHSC  Village Health and Sanitation Committee
VHND  Village Health and Nutrition Day
VPD  Vaccine Preventable Disease
VVM  Vaccine Vial Monitor
WMF  Wastage Multiplication Factor
WPV  Wild Poliovirus
WHO  World Health Organization

1IntroductionUnit 1

2Contents Page
1.1. Importance of immunization 3
1.2. The Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) in India 3
1.3. Immunization programme milestones – India 4
1.4. Impact of vaccination on vaccine preventable diseases in India 6Learning Objectives 
At the end of the unit, Health worker should be able:
• To describe the importance of immunization 
• To understand the objectives of Universal Immunization Programme 
(UIP)
• To illustrate the milestones of immunization programme in India         

3
INTRODUCTIONIntroduction
1.1. Importance of immunization
Vaccination is the process of providing safe and effective vaccines to the beneficiaries. 
Immunization  is the development of body’s protective response following vaccination. 
Immunization is thus the outcome of vaccination.1 
Vaccines are highly regulated, biological products designed to induce a protective immune 
response effectively and safely. Once introduced, they stimulate the immune system in the 
body   to produce “antibodies” against the disease-causing organisms. Each vaccine provides 
immunity against a particular disease; therefore, several vaccines are administered to 
children and women to protect them from vaccine-preventable diseases.
Immunization is a proven tool for controlling and eliminating life-threatening infectious 
diseases and globally it prevents 35-50 lakh deaths every year from diseases like diphtheria, 
tetanus, pertussis, influenza and measles. It is one of the most cost-effective health 
investments, with proven strategies that make it accessible to even the most hard-to reach 
and vulnerable populations. It has clearly defined target groups; it can be delivered effectively 
through outreach activities.
Target beneficiary: All eligible children and pregnant women in the catchment area of 
Subcenter/ ANM area should receive the benefits of immunization. The health worker should 
remember that all visitors (Eg. Pregnant woman coming to mother’s house, children visiting 
grandparents, etc.), tenants eligible children and pregnant women should also be vaccinated. 
All migrant population (nomads) or temporary settlements staying in sub-centre/ ANM area 
should also be vaccinated.
1.2 The Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) in India:2
Universal Immunization programme of India is one of the world’s largest health programmes. 
All vaccines provided under Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) are voluntary in 
nature. However, it is emphasized and encouraged that all eligible beneficiaries must take 
all vaccines, as prescribed in the UIP schedule. All caregivers are encouraged in larger 
public interest and public good, to ensure that the eligible beneficiaries under their care are 
vaccinated with all the vaccines provided under UIP in a timely manner. The society at large 
is healthy, and the vaccine preventable diseases can be kept under control only, if all eligible 
beneficiaries of UIP are vaccinated under UIP programme.

4The Aim of UIP:
The aim of UIP is that eligible beneficiaries should get all UIP vaccines in India, so that they 
may be protected from life threatening vaccine preventable diseases against which vaccines 
are provided under UIP in India.  
Objectives:
•	 To attain more than 90% full immunization coverage on a year-to-year basis and sustain 
the gains 
•	 To achieve MR elimination
•	 To maintain and sustain Polio free status and Maternal & Neonatal Tetanus elimination 
•	 To sustain robust VPD and AEFI surveillance 
•	 To ensure efficient supply chain, cold-chain and logistic system for UIP
•	 To provide regular supportive supervision to UIP 
•	 To ensure accountability framework through regular task force meetings 
•	 To expand digitization in UIP 
•	 To introduce need based new vaccines
Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) of India has a target of nearly 2.6 crore newborns 
and 3.0 crore pregnant women per year. About 1.3 crore routine immunization (RI) sessions 
are planned annually.
UIP offers vaccines against twelve Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPDs) of which eleven are 
nationwide and one [Japanese Encephalitis (JE) in endemic districts] is sub-national. The 
UIP has significantly contributed to reduction in morbidity and mortality due to Vaccine 
preventable diseases (VPDs). The next major milestone to be achieved is Measles and Rubella 
Elimination. For this achievement, it is necessary that, all children till the age of 5 years are 
immunized with two doses of Measles Rubella containing vaccines (MRCV).
1.3 Immunization programme milestones – India3
The immunization programme milestones in India, starting from the year of Smallpox free 
declaration in India in 1977 is shown in table no.1.1.Annual target
2.6 crore newborns 
3.0 crore pregnant women
Vaccine against VPDs
11 nation wide 
1 sub-
nationally (JE)
~1.3 crore sessi ons 
planned per year ~30,000 cold-chain points for 
storage and distribution
Figure. 1.1: Snapshot of facts about RI programme in IndiaINTRODUCTION

5Table 1.1. Immunization programme milestones – India3
1977 •	India declared Smallpox free 
1978 •	Expanded Programme of Immunization (EPI) launched with BCG, DPT, 
OPV, Typhoid (urban areas)
1983 •	TT vaccine for pregnant women
1985 •	EPI expanded nationwide as Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) 
with addition of measles and removal of Typhoid vaccines; Focus on 
children less than one year of age 
1986 •	Technology mission for expansion of UIP – Monitoring under PMO’s 
20-point programme
1990 •	Vitamin-A supplementation
1992 •	UIP became a part of Child Survival and Safe Motherhood (CSSM) 
included both UIP and Safe motherhood programme
1995 •	Polio National Immunization Days
1997 •	Vaccine Vial Monitor introduced in Polio vaccine for campaign. Later 
expanded to all UIP vaccines in 2006 
•	UIP became a part of RCH-1 programme
2001 •	National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) in India was 
formed 
2002 •	Hepatitis B vaccine introduced as pilot in 33 districts & 16 cities of 10 
states
2005 •	Auto Disable (AD) Syringes introduced into UIP
2006 •	Immunization week strategy was introduced to strengthen immunization
•	Japanese Encephalitis (JE) vaccine introduced after campaigns in 
endemic districts
2007-2008 •	Hepatitis B vaccine expanded to all districts in 10 states  
2010 •	Measles 2nd dose introduced in RI (21 states) and after Measles vaccine 
catch up campaign (MCUP) (14 states) covering 9 months-10 years over a 
period of 3 years
•	Hepatitis B vaccine scaled up nationwide
2011 •	Pentavalent vaccine (DPT, Hepatitis B, Hib) introduction in phased 
manner. However, the birth dose of Hepatitis B and booster dose of DPT 
vaccines continued 
2013 •	Second dose of JE vaccine introduced
•	Open Vial Policy for vaccines in UIP
•	e-VIN introduced
2014 •	India and Southeast Asia Region certified POLIO- FREE
•	Launch of Mission Indradhanush for low immunization coverage pockets
2015 •	Pentavalent vaccine expanded to all states
•	Inactivated Polio Vaccine introduced in 5 states
•	India validated for Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus elimination
2016 •	Rotavirus vaccine introduced in 4 states in phased manner                   
•	tOPV to bOPV Switch (25 April)
•	Switch to fractional IPV nationwide
INTRODUCTION

62017 •	MR vaccine introduced through campaign in 9 months - 15 years replacing 
measles vaccine, followed by its inclusion in NIS
•	Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV)  introduced (Phased manner)
•	Use of adrenaline (intramuscular) at immunization session site by ANM 
•	Intensified Mission Indradhanush (IMI) campaign
2019 •	Td vaccine introduced replacing TT vaccine
2019 •	Rotavirus vaccine expanded nationwide 
2021 •	Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine nationwide expansion 
•	COVID-19 vaccine introduced using CoWIN platform 
2022 •	Rota virus vaccine formulation with VVM on Label introduced, which 
becomes eligible for Open Vial Policy
2023 •	Introduction of 3rd dose of fractional IPV at 9-11 months (fIPV 3)
•	U-WIN introduced, as a pilot in 65 districts and rollout across the country 
during Intensified Mission Indradhanush 5.0
Government of India is planning to introduce Typhoid Conjugate Vaccine (TCV) and Human 
Papilloma Virus (HPV) vaccine in UIP.
Fig. 1.2 Vaccine introduction under Immunization Programme in India
1985 2006 2011 2015 2017 2019 2022
2002 2010 2013 2016 2019 2021 2023Vaccines against
6 VPDs-Measles,
DPT, TB, PolioJE vaccine
introducedPentavalent
(2011-2015)IPV introduction
(2015-16)MR, PCV
JE AdultRotavirus vaccine
expanded nation wideRVV Product
Switch
Hep. B pilot Measles 2nd dose
(2010-13)
Hep. B scaled up
nationwideJE 2nd dose Rotavirus vaccine
introduced
Switch from tOPV to
bOPVTd replacing
TTCOVID-19
Vaccination
Campaign
PCV NationwideflPV 3rd dose
introduced
1.4 Impact of vaccination on vaccine preventable diseases in India
The vaccination in India under UIP has resulted in significant impact in bringing down 
morbidity and mortality due to Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPDs). Surveillance and other 
data sources have shown the decline in the VPD burden over the years (ref. Fig.1.3). The 
infographic below demonstrates the successes but also reminds us of the need to increase 
our efforts to reach the unreached and sustain good coverage.INTRODUCTION

7Fig. 1.3: Impact of vaccines on vaccine preventable diseases in India
Name of
DISEASEYear of introduction of
vaccine in the countryDecrease in
disease burdenIMPACT of VACCINES
(Number of reported cases)Est. cases at/around
the time of vaccine
introduction
SMALLPOX
POLIO
NEONATAL
TETANUS (NNT)1973
(Mass Campaign)
1978
(EPI)
1978
(EPI)1974
1,88,000 cases
1978
2,00,000 cases
1980
45,948 casesEradicated in 1977
ZERO CASE
Polio-Free in 2014
ZERO CASE
Eliminated in 2015
(<1 case / 1000 live births)
81 cases 2021100%
100%
99%
Smallpox:  1.88 lakh cases were affected in 1974. So, in 45 years after eradication 84.6 lakh 
children are assumed to be protected.
Poliomyelitis:  2.0 lakh cases were affected in 1978. So, in 10 years after certified as polio free, 
20.0 lakh children are assumed to be protected.
Neonatal Tetanus (NNT): 46 thousand cases were affected in 1980. So, in 10 years after 
declaration of elimination in 2015, 4.6 lakh children are assumed to be protected.
INTRODUCTION

8

9Roles and responsibilities of health 
workers in immunizationUnit 2

10Key contents Page
2.1 Roles and responsibilities of Health Workers in Routine Immunization 11
2.2 Roles and responsibilities of Community Health Officer  
 (CHO) in providing Routine Immunization services16Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, Health worker should be able: 
• To enlist the roles and responsibilities of Health Workers in Routine 
Immunization.
• To understand the roles and responsibilities of Community Health 
Officers in Routine Immunization.

112.1 Roles and responsibilities of Health Workers in Immunization1
Health care worker in the context of immunization: This handbook is primarily aimed 
towards Auxiliary Nurse Mid-wife (ANM), however all those who are actively administering 
vaccine in health care and community settings are also called as Health care worker in 
context of immunization and they are advised to refer this handbook. Health care workers 
include Health worker (Female) / ANM, Health worker (Male), CHO/ HWO, Nursing staff, etc.     
Health workers play a major role in providing Immunization services to mothers & children. 
They are expected to put all efforts to vaccinate all children and pregnant women as per the 
National Immunization Schedule. Their roles and responsibilities are highlighted under the 
following headings
a) Planning for Immunization 
b) Managing the Cold-chain 
c) Vaccine and logistics management at the immunization session site 
d) Preparing and conducting the immunization session 
e) Communicating with caregivers
f) Mobilizing the beneficiaries
g) AEFI Management
h) Recording, reporting of immunization data in U-WIN and relevant registers and tracking 
of left outs and dropouts 
i) Capacity building of ASHAs, AWWs, link workers, Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS) and other 
mobilizers to perform their roles in UIP 
j) Sensitization of local influencers, CBOs, village elders, local religious leaders, faith 
healers, etc.
k) Coordination with ICDS, panchayat raj and line departments 
a) Planning for Immunization: Activities to be done
Once a year: 
Actively participate in preparing and generating new RI microplans including house to 
house survey and head counting 
o to ensure that there is clear area demarcation between ANMs, ASHAs, so that there is 
no missed areas between ANMs and ASHAs
o identify the AWW in the catchment area and liaise, coordinate, cooperate with the 
AWWs to ensure all immunization related services are delivered
o at the beginning of the financial year, actual head count survey should be carried out 
effectively to get the actual population and beneficiaries count to plan RI sessions 
and estimate annual and monthly vaccine and logistics requirements
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATIONRoles and responsibilities 
of health workers in 
immunization

12Every six months: 
House to House (H to H survey) and Head counting needs to be repeated after six months 
to update the beneficiary records. This activity should be preferably done in coordination 
with ICDS, line departments and key stake holders which will help to 
o identify any new sites for inclusion and update the beneficiary due lists for effective 
mobilization
o all areas including migratory high-risk areas are included into the master list with map. 
Any new houses, settlements, habitations, etc. are to be included in the microplan as 
and when needed. Update the beneficiary due lists for effective mobilization
Every three months: 
Participate in RI microplan review at Block/ PHC/UPHC to help 
o update the plans to address emerging situations Eg. new migratory HRAs, vacant 
subcenters, changes in vaccine delivery, other issues based on monitoring results, 
etc. 
o ensure preregistration of new beneficiaries in the U-WIN if not done earlier through 
ASHA. If there is no ASHA, preregistration should be done by Health worker and enter 
of next quarter into U-WIN
Every month: 
At Sub centre/ ANM area: with the involvement of ASHA/ AWW 
o to review due lists of all the sessions held in the previous month
o track the beneficiaries by use of tracking bag and counterfoils
o ensure preregistration of new beneficiaries in the U-WIN if not done earlier through 
ASHA. If there is no ASHA, preregistration should be done by Health worker
o discuss important issues related to RI services with the medical officer (MO) for their 
support
After every RI session: 
o Ensure that the session catchment area is clearly demarcated and ANM is aware of 
their respective catchment area
o Review the session due list with the involvement of ASHA/AWW/ Link workers/other 
mobilizers
o ensure that the beneficiary list is complete and updated in the U-WIN
o identify all the eligible beneficiary who were not vaccinated in the RI session. These 
beneficiaries should be included in the due list of next RI session
o ensure follow-up visits to beneficiaries to identify any AEFIs. Inform medical officer 
about AEFI and ensure it is recorded in the AEFI register and reported through SAFEVAC
o Guide ASHA/mobilizer to identify, newborns/pregnant women for inclusion in 
beneficiary and due list
o guide ASHA/mobilizer to visit these houses during other field visits and remind 
beneficiaries about importance of immunization and tell them about next date and 
place of RI session
b) Managing the Cold-chain (if applicable) 
As a vaccine and cold-chain handler at the cold-chain point, Health worker is responsible 
for: 
o Daily maintenance and cleanliness of cold-chain equipment
o Ensure that data loggers of e-VIN for that ILR is installed. If not installed, inform the 
medical officer. All the electrical cold-chain equipments, should have functional data ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATION

13loggers installed
o The temperature of the data logger should also be monitored twice daily along with 
temperature recording from alcohol stem thermometer. However, the recording of 
the temperature in the register should be from alcohol stem thermometer only
o Identify if the e-VIN sensors are working. If the health worker notices that the 
temperature of data loggers is outside the recommended range for the particular 
equipment or the temperature is not relayed to e-VIN web on a daily basis, they should 
immediately inform district VCCM and district cold-chain technician
o Monthly vaccine and logistics indenting, receipt and storage
o Timely issue of vaccine to the lower store/sessions as per microplan
o Timely update of stock and issue registers for vaccines and logistics
o Breakdown reporting of equipment including solar equipment immediately If the 
facility has solar powered ILR then, it should be ensured that, the solar panels are 
kept clean
o Monthly vaccine utilization including wastage reporting both in e-VIN and register;
o Refer and follow e-VIN and U-WIN guidelines
c) Vaccine and logistics management at the immunization session site 
o Ensure that vaccines are carried in a vaccine carrier with 4 well-sealed conditioned 
ice packs
o Ensure vaccine carriers are kept in shade and are not opened frequently
o Required number of vaccines, Auto disabled and reconstitution syringes are available
o Bundling: It is the procedure of vaccine and logistic packaging to ensure that the 
vaccines are always supplied with corresponding diluents, droppers, AD syringes and 
reconstitution syringes, in correct quantities to the session site
Examples of bundling are as follows:
	OPV, RVV vials should be equal to the number of droppers and or RVV dispenser 
syringes
	MR and BCG vaccine vials and their respective supplied diluents (bundled diluent)* 
and 5 ml reconstitution syringes should be equal in number
* Bundled diluents are the one’s which are supplied with the vaccine by the 
manufacturer
o Wrap vaccine vials and diluent ampoules in thick paper (e.g. plain white paper) 
before putting in polythene bag so as to prevent them from touching the icepacks. 
Place some packing material between ‘T’ series vaccines (DPT, Td, Pentavalent and 
Hepatitis B vaccines), fIPV, PCV, JE (inactivated) vaccines, and the icepacks to prevent 
them from touching the icepacks
o After use ensure that the vaccine carrier is cleaned and dried appropriately
o Ensure that adequate amount of new blank MCP cards and functional hub cutters are 
also taken
o Check the labels for expiry date and VVM of the vaccine vials before use
o Ensure Open Vial Policy applicable vaccine vials have readable labels with date and 
time of opening
o Check that T-Series and Hep B, fIPV, PCV, JE (inactivated) vaccines are not frozen
o Follow the guidelines for use of open vaccine vials
o Check that required diluents are placed in cold-chain
o Ensure that the reconstitution guidelines are followed for BCG, MR vaccines
o Anaphylaxis kit contains all needed items as per checklist
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATION

14d) Preparing and conducting the immunization session 
o Prepare and conduct sessions at appropriate sites adhering to the guidelines. (Refer 
Unit-9)
o Involve community influencers and leaders to support in conducting successful 
immunization sessions. (Community influencer - any person from local area whose 
words are respected and can help solve the problems in conducting successful sessions.) 
e) Communicating with caregivers 
Soft communication skills are followed while communicating with the caregivers. Ensure 
that the following four key messages are delivered during vaccination
o Explain what vaccine(s) will be given and the disease it prevents
o Mention possible adverse events (minor AEFIs) and explain how to handle them
o Explain the need for the child to return for each contact in the immunization schedule 
to be fully protected. Write the date for the next vaccination on the immunization 
card and tell the caregiver
o Remind the caregiver to bring the immunization card when they bring the child back 
for the next vaccination
f) Recording, Reporting and tracking of dropouts 
o All U-WIN related activities including ABHA generation (if ABHA of the beneficiary has 
not been generated previously) are to be ensured
o Record all vaccinations in a due list cum tally sheet, immunization card and 
immunization register
o Mark the date of vaccination and the next due date on the card, and ensure that the 
caregiver understands when and where to return for the next dose(s) of vaccine(s)
o Keep the updated counter foil of the immunization card in tracking bag
o Share the list of dropouts with AWW and ASHA and ensure they are mobilized to the 
session
o Maintain immunization coverage monitoring chart at the sub center
o Report all suspected cases of Tuberculosis, Diphtheria, Pertussis, Neonatal Tetanus, 
Fever and Rash, Acute Flaccid Paralysis (AFP) and Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) 
to the medical officer
o Report all Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFIs). Ensure recording of all 
AEFIs is done in the PHC/ UPHC AEFI register followed by entry in SAFEVAC. These 
data is to be updated in Block AEFI register also
g) Capacity building of ASHAs, AWWs, link workers and other mobilizers to perform 
their roles in UIP 
For Immunization planning - train them to: 
o Describe the national immunization schedule and address FAQs
o Conduct the house-to-house survey to undertake head count and generate beneficiary 
list (children upto 2 years, missed children between 2-5 years and pregnant women); 
o Contribute to finalizing master list of villages/Urban areas, including HRAs and 
underserved population
o Have clear area demarcation between ASHA, AWW /LW/ other mobilizers
o Help create working maps for each area
o Help in preparing the beneficiary due listROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATION

15o Help in planning and selection of the site, day and time of the session in the village/ 
urban area
o Share the list of newborns in the area with the ANM every month
o Conduct community mobilization activities for each session site and sub centre/ ANM 
area
o Visit households to inform the due beneficiaries for vaccination day and site
o Report all suspected VPDs
o Help the ASHA for U-WIN related queries
For managing immunization session, train them to: 
o Assist in setting up RI session site
o Ensure all beneficiaries are brought to the session site as per due beneficiary list. 
There may be a need of repeated visits to bring the beneficiary for vaccination. There 
also may be need to take help from local influencers for mobilizing the beneficiaries
o Assist in conducting the immunization session. (Control the crowd, assist in recording, 
etc.)
o Remind caregivers of the 4 key messages about immunization
o Ensure beneficiaries wait for 30 minutes at the session site after immunization
o Help with preparing the due list for next session
For post immunization follow-up - train them to: 
o Report any AEFI to the ANM or Medical officer and refer them to identified AEFI 
management center
o Visit the houses of dropouts and leftouts to counsel the mothers to immunize their 
children
o Contact you for any advise or questions pertaining to vaccination
h) Coordination with ICDS 
Use the following sources of information in planning immunization: 
o List and map of villages including hamlets /urban areas /wards/ mohallas
o 0-6 years registers, eligible couple register, etc. for total and beneficiary population
o VHSND/ UHND microplans
o AWW/Helper list
o Panchayath records or lists
Follow up for the participation of respective ICDS and line department staff in sectoral 
review meetings held at PHC/ UPHC for good coordination.
Involve the ICDS, panchayat supervisors to: 
o Visit field to monitor the house-to-house survey conducted by AWWs
o Supervise the filling of forms SC- 3, SC-4A, SC-4B and SC-4C
o Support in review of all survey forms and consolidation of sub centre microplans 
during meeting at SC/ ANM area
o Be aware of Health and ICDS sector boundaries for joint planning, implementation 
and monitoring of immunization activities
o Contribute to development of communication plan
o Ensure that the AWWs are regularly trained in immunization/mobilization
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATION

162.2. Roles and responsibilities of Community Health Officer (CHO) in  
 providing Routine Immunization services
Community Health Officer (CHO) oversees and facilitates all aspects of routine immunization 
(RI) services, playing a vital role in promoting immunization uptake and ensuring quality 
service delivery in their communities through following activities:
Service provision
o Ensure early registration of child at the nearest Ayushman Arogya Mandir (AAM) to 
avail the immunization services
o Ensure immunization services at Routine Immunization (RI) sessions, VHNDs, health 
campaigns, health promotion events, etc.
o Ensure quality head count survey for immunization services by supportive supervision 
of activities of ANM and ASHA
o Ensure meticulous micro planning for routine immunization services, high- risk area 
(HRA) tagging, mapping of areas under sub-health centre with areas demarcation for 
each ANM, if more than 2 ANMs
o Supportive supervision of activities of ANM and ASHAs in preparation of line listing, 
regular updating of list of eligible children, review of due list prepared and tracking 
dropouts and left out children. Ensure reasons for dropouts are entered in the routine 
immunization counterfoil in the MCP card by you or the ANM
o Ensure availability of vaccines and logistics at cold-chain points and session sites 
(including anaphylaxis) in the AAM-SHC area
o Ensure cold-chain and equipment management
o Supportive supervision of immunization session site and ensure availability of 
updated due list, proper vaccination technique, vaccine management is undertaken. 
o Ensure observance of standard precautions to prevent infection and appropriate 
waste segregation and disposal
o Ensure ANM is providing four key messages after child vaccination to their mother/
caregivers - what vaccine was given and what disease it prevents, when and where to 
come for the next visit, what minor adverse events could occur and how to deal with 
them and to keep the immunization card safe and bring it along for the next visit
o Submit monthly reports and ensure availability and quality of records-MCP, RCH/
Immunization register, RCH Portal, etc. 
o Ensuring early identification, classification, recording, reporting and referral for 
AEFI, if any. Management of minor AEFIs (like fever, pain, etc.) symptomatically and 
establishing linkages with nearby health facility for management of serious AEFIs like 
to the Medical Officer. Accompany the mother/caregiver of the child if needed to the 
referral health facility
o Report all AEFIs to the Medical Officer at AAM-PHC immediately. The process of finding 
out the reasons for the AEFI will help the MO and you to understand why the event 
happened
o Ensure all AEFIs details are entered in the AEFI block register maintained at the Block 
PHC
o Facilitation of any campaign/intensification activity including inter-sectoral 
coordination. Organise inter-sectoral coordination meetings with ICDS/local village 
administration/NGOs, etc.
o Monitor surveillance activities undertaken by ANM and ASHAs to ensure all cases are ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATION

17reported from health facility and community; regular review of sub-health centre 
surveillance reports for completeness and accuracy (activities include surveillance 
for diphtheria, pertussis, neonatal tetanus, measles, rubella and polio)
Demand generation
o Organise meetings to discuss and orient ASHA/ANM in their area for increasing 
demand for immunization services, building vaccine confidence among caregivers 
and mobilising beneficiaries for timely vaccination
o Praise and encourage the family for ensuring their child’s immunization if all necessary 
vaccines have been given
o Counsel beneficiaries, handhold ASHAs and ANMs and partner with community to 
overcome social, economic, geographic barriers in improving immunization coverage. 
o Active mobilisation of all beneficiaries by ASHAs and ANMs with focus on reaching 
the marginalised and migrant population. Check the immunization status of the child 
from the MCP card whether child has received age-appropriate vaccines
o Inform when and where the family can take the child for the next vaccination, for a 
missed vaccine, or if a vaccine is due soon
o Allay fear of Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI)
o Coordination with community/religious/local leaders, teachers and volunteers on 
regular basis; encourage them to discuss immunization in their meetings
o Ensure effective mobilisation of children by ASHA, ANM and VHSNC members for 
immunization sessions during VHND session or at the health facilities
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN IMMUNIZATION

18

19National Immunization ScheduleUnit 3

20Key contents Page
3.1. National Immunization Schedule (NIS) 21
3.2. Sequence of vaccines administered at different schedule in UIP 23
3.3. Definitions of vaccination status of beneficiaries in UIP 27Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, Health worker should be able:
• To enlist vaccines administered in the National Immunization 
Programme, due ages for vaccination, number of doses along with 
site and route of administration.  

21National Immunization 
Schedule
3.1. National Immunization Schedule (NIS)
The aim of UIP is that eligible beneficiaries should get all UIP vaccines in a timely manner 
as specified in UIP schedule, so that they may be protected from life threatening vaccine 
preventable diseases against which vaccines are provided under the UIP in India.
Vaccination of beneficiaries in Universal Immunization programme:
Pregnant women
• As early as possible during the First Antenatal visit- appropriate Td doses
Infants and children
• At birth - Hep B, bOPV, BCG
• Vaccines to be given to a child by first year of age
o 3 doses of bOPV, 3 doses of Rotavirus vaccine, 3 doses of Pentavalent, 3 doses of 
fractional IPV, 3 doses of PCV, 1st dose of MR vaccine, 1st dose of JE vaccine (where 
applicable)
• Vaccines to be given to a child by second year of age
o 2nd dose of MR vaccine, 1st dose of DPT booster, 1 dose of bOPV booster and 2nd 
dose of JE vaccine (where applicable)
• Vaccines to be given to a child after 5 years – 2nd dose of DPT booster at 5 years, 1 dose 
of Td vaccine at 10 years & 1 dose of Td vaccine at 16 years
Hep B – Hepatitis B; bOPV – Bi valent oral polio vaccine; BCG – Bacillus Calmette-Guerin; IPV – Inactivated Polio 
Vaccine; PCV – Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine; MR- Measles Rubella vaccine; JE – Japanese Encephalitis; DPT –
Diphtheria–pertussis–tetanus; Td – Tetanus diphtheria
Different syringes and needle positions for vaccine administration:
Fig. No. 3.1: Different syringes and needle positions for vaccine administration
NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

22Table 3.1. National Immunization Schedule (NIS) for Pregnant Women, Infants and 
Children4, 5-9
Vaccine Age of administration Maximum age Dose Route Site
For Pregnant Women
 Td-1 As early as possible 
during First Antenatal 
visit 4 wks before 
EDD* If not 
received, any 
time before 
delivery0.5 ml Intra-muscular Upper Arm in 
Deltoid region
 Td-2* 4 weeks after Td-1 Any time after 4 
wks from Td-1 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Upper Arm in 
Deltoid region
 Td- Booster**If received two Td doses 
during pregnancy within 
the last 3 years. #Give 
Td-2 or Booster doses 
before 36 weeks of 
pregnancy. However, 
give these even if more 
than 36 weeks have 
passed. Give Td to a 
woman in labour, if 
she has not previously 
recieved Td.4 wks before 
EDD* If not 
received, any 
time before 
delivery0.5 ml Intra-muscular Upper Arm in 
Deltoid region
For Infants
 BCG $ At birth one year of 
age, before 1st 
birthday0.05 ml  
(upto 1 month 
of age)
0.1ml  
(1 month  
to 1 year)Intra-dermal Upper Arm in 
Deltoid region 
- LEFT
 Hepatitis B 
-Birth doseAt birth within 24 hours 
of birth0.5 ml Intra-muscular Antero- lateral 
side of mid-
thigh -  LEFT
 bOPV-0 At birth within the first 
15 days of age2 drops Oral Mouth
 bOPV 1, 2 and 3 At 6, 10 and 14 weeks 
of agetill 5 years of 
age2 drops Oral Mouth
Rotavirus 
vaccine 1, 2 and 
3®At 6, 10 and 14 weeks 
of age 1 year of age 5 drops or 2ml 
as per vaccine 
formulations Oral Mouth
 f-IPV 1, 2 and 3 At 6, 14 weeks and at 9 
-11 months of age1 year of age 0.1 ml Intra-dermal Upper Arm in 
Deltoid region 
-RIGHT  for 
fIPV-1 & fIPV-2 
-LEFT  for 
fIPV-3 
Pneumococcal 
Conjugate 
Vaccine (PCV) 
(2 Primary +1 
booster)At 6, 14 weeks for 
primary doses, and 9-11 
months for booster 
dose 1 year of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Antero-lateral 
side of mid-
thigh - RIGHT  
 Pentavalent 1, 
2 and 3At 6, 10 and 14 weeks 
of age1 year of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Antero- lateral 
side of mid-
thigh- LEFTNATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

23 Measles 
Rubella vaccine 
(MR) 1st dose#9 to 11 months of age 5 years of age 0.5 ml Sub- cutaneous Upper arm in 
Deltoid region 
- RIGHT
Japanese 
Encephalitis– 1¥
(in selected 
districts)9 to 11 months of age 2 years of age 
(Killed & live 
vaccine)0.5 ml Killed Vaccine: 
Intra-muscular 
Or
Live  
attenuated 
Vaccine: 
Subcutaneous Killed vaccine:
Antero-lateral 
side of mid-
thigh – LEFT
Or
Live 
attenuated 
vaccine: Upper 
arm in Deltoid 
region – LEFT 
Vitamin A  
(1st dose)9 months with MR 
1st dose5 years of age 1 ml (1 lakh IU) Oral Mouth
For Children
bOPV Booster 16 to 23 months 5 years of age 2 drops Oral Mouth
MR 2nd dose#16 to 23 months of age 5 years of age 0.5 ml Sub-cutaneous Upper Arm-
RIGHT
DPT Booster-1 16 to 23 months of age 7 years of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Antero- lateral 
side of mid-
thigh– LEFT
JE vaccine 2nd 
dose¥ 
(in selected 
districts)16 to 23 months of age 2 years of age 0.5 ml Killed Vaccine: 
Intra-muscular 
or
Live  
attenuated 
Vaccine: 
Subcutaneous Killed vaccine:
Antero-lateral 
side of mid-
thigh – RIGHT
or
Live 
attenuated 
vaccine: Upper 
arm – LEFT 
Vitamin A  
(2nd to 9th  dose) 16 to 23 months with 
MR 2nd dose, subsequent 
doses at an interval of 
6 months, upto 5 years 
of age5 years of age 2 ml (2 lakh IU) Oral Mouth 
DPT Booster-2 5 to 6 years of age 7 years of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Upper Arm 
-LEFT
Td 10 and 16 years of age 16 years of age 0.5 ml Intra-muscular Upper Arm 
-LEFT
Note: Age mentioned in above table are in completed weeks/ months/ years
* EDD=Expected Date of delivery 
$ BCG vaccine requires reconstitution with diluent which is supplied by the manufacturer 
® Rotavirus vaccine – Open vial policy is applicable to RVV with VVM on the label; Not applicable to RVV with VVM on the cap 
# MR vaccine requires reconstitution with diluent which is supplied by the manufacturer 
¥JE Vaccine is provided in select districts in India. JE (Live) vaccine requires reconstitution with diluent which is supplied by the 
manufacturer
3.2. Sequence of vaccines administered at different schedule in UIP:  
The below mentioned pictures represent the sequence of different vaccines that are 
administered at different schedule in UIP.  It should be remembered that Oral vaccines have 
to be given first followed by injections.
NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

24Fig. no. 3.2: Pictorial representation of sequence of vaccination from birth up to 16-23 months
  
Sequence of vaccination at birth
OPV Vaccine
1
1BCG Vaccine
2Hep B Vaccine
3
BCGHep B
32Hep B
BCG
Right SideLe/f_t Side
Sequence of vaccination at 6 weeks
Rota Vaccine
2
1fIPV Vaccine
3PCV Vaccine
4
IPVPCV
5PentaPenta Vaccine
5 Penta
OPV Vaccine
1
2
3IPV
4PCV
Right Side Le/f_t Side  NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

25
Sequence of vaccination at 10 weeks
Rota Vaccine
2
1
3PentaPenta Vaccine
3 Penta
OPV Vaccine
1
2PCV
Right Side Le/f_t Side
Sequence of vaccination at 14 weeks
Rota Vaccine
2
1fIPV Vaccine
3PCV Vaccine
4
IPVPCV
5PentaPenta Vaccine
5 Penta
OPV Vaccine
1
2
3IPV
4PCV
Right Side Le/f_t Side
NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

26
Sequence of vaccination at 9-11months
MR Vaccine
2PCV Vaccine
3
MR
fIPV Vaccine
1 IPVPCV
4JEJE Vaccine*
4 JE
2MR1fIPV
3PCV
Right Side Le/f_t Side*JE in endemic districts
Sequence of vaccination at  16-23 months
MR Vaccine
2DPT Vaccine
3
MRDPT
3DPTJE Vaccine*
4 JE
2MR
4JE
Right Side Le/f_t Side*JE in endemic districtsOPV Vaccine
1
1NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

273.3 Definitions of vaccination status of beneficiaries in UIP:
Full Immunization:  Child who has received BCG, 3 doses of bOPV, 3 doses of Pentavalent and 
1 dose of MR by first year of age. This is the historical definition used for survey and evaluation 
purposes and hence has been continued - Full Immunization coverage (FIC).
FIC plus:  Child who has received all the vaccines given in the Universal Immunization 
Programme (UIP) by one year of age.
Complete Immunization:  Child who has received all the vaccines given in the Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP) by two years of age.
Left-out:  Child who has not received any vaccine under UIP (unimmunized).
Drop-out:  Child who has received one or more UIP vaccine/s but did not complete the schedule 
as per the age (partially immunized).
Zero-dose (operational & reporting purpose):  Child who has not received first dose of 
Pentavalent vaccine by one year of age.10
“Continuous tracking and vaccinating left-out, Zero dose and drop-out children are to be 
ensured to achieve 100% full immunization coverage”.
Full Immunization coverage (FIC) plus: 
Child who has received  all the vaccines given nationally in the Universal Immunization 
Programme (UIP) by one year of age. This is a new indicator  for measuring the Universal 
Immunization Programme.
Need for FIC Plus: 
FIC as an indicator is well established and widely used. This indicator has been in use since 
NFHS-1 survey of 1992-93, during that time only few vaccines (BCG, OPV, DPT, Measles) were 
administered to a child till first birthday.  However, as on January 2024 in addition to the 
above-mentioned vaccines new vaccines have also been added in the UIP like IPV, PCV & 
Rota). Therefore, there is a programmatic need to measure the administration of all of these 
doses to the child. Hence the concept of FIC Plus has been introduced.
A child will be counted as FIC plus if the child has received all the doses of the following 
vaccines – BCG, 3 doses of OPV, 3 doses of Penta, 3 doses of IPV, 3 doses of Rota, 3 doses of 
PCV and one dose of MR before first birthday throughout the country.
It is reiterated that FIC will continue to be used as an indicator as it will facilitate national and 
global compatibility with previous data.
India is targeting MR Elimination and therefore the missed dose of MR vaccine is to be 
given to any child upto 5 years of age.
Zero Dose children: 
For operational and reporting purposes, “zero-dose children” are defined as children who 
have not received the first dose of Pentavalent vaccine by 1 year of age.10
NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE

28Fig. No. 3.3: Concept of Zero dose children
Le/f_t out children
Dropout children but received Penta-1
Fully immunized childrenDropout childrenZero dose children
Dropout children but not received Penta-1
Calculation of Zero dose children: It is calculated as the difference between the estimated 
number of surviving infants and the number of children vaccinated with Penta-1 dose.
•	As shown in the figure below, 
o All Left out/ unimmunized children of one year age are Zero Dose children
o Zero Dose children also include children, who received any other vaccines but not 
received Penta-1
So, Zero Dose Children include  Left Out Children of one year age + Drop out children who 
have not received Penta-1 dose (though may have received  any other vaccine).
 
Table No. 3.1: Snapshot of vaccines administered in National Immunization schedule: 
Beneficiary Age Vaccines given
InfantsBirth BCG, bOPV-0, Hepatitis B Birth dose
6 Weeks bOPV-1, Pentavalent-1, fIPV-1, RVV-1 & PCV-1
10 Weeks bOPV-2, Pentavalent-2 & RVV-2
14 Weeks bOPV-3, Pentavalent-3, fIPV-2, RVV-3 & PCV-2
9-11 months MR-1,  JE-1* , PCV-B, fIPV-3 & Vitamin- A 1st dose
Children16-23 monthsMR-2, JE-2*, DPT-B 1, bOPV-B and  Vitamin-A  
(2nd to 9th dose) one dose every 6 month up to 5 years
5-6 years DPT-B 2
10 years Td
16 years Td
Pregnant Mother: Td 1, 2 or Td Booster**NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SCHEDULE
*JE Vaccine in selected areas (endemic districts) only
**one dose if previously vaccinated by two doses of Td within last 3 years 
bOPV – Bi valent oral polio vaccine; BCG – Bacillus Calmette-Guerin; fIPV –Fractional IPV
RVV – Rota virus vaccine; PCV – Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine;   JE- Japanese Encephalitis;  
DPT – Diphtheria–pertussis–tetanus; Td – Tetanus diphtheria

29Diseases prevented by vaccinationUnit 4

30Key contents Page
4.1. Diseases prevented by Immunization under UIP Programme 31Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, Health worker should be able:
• To enlist diseases that are preventable by immunization under the 
Universal Immunization Programme (UIP). 
• To describe their mode of spread and how they can be recognized 
and prevented. 

314.1. Diseases prevented by Immunization under UIP Programme1, 11-15
The following are the targeted vaccine preventable diseases under Universal Immunization 
Programme:
1. Severe form of childhood Tuberculosis   
2. Hepatitis B 
3. Poliomyelitis
4. Diphtheria 
5. Pertussis 
6. Tetanus7. Haemophilus influenzae Type b related 
diseases 
8. Diarrhoea due to rotavirus 
9. Pneumococcus related diseases 
10. Measles 
11. Rubella 
12. Japanese Encephalitis
1. Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by the bacterium ( Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis ). It usually attacks the lungs but can also affect other 
parts of the body including the bones, joints and brain. TB can 
cause serious illness and death.
Recognition of the disease: 
•	A person with fever and/or cough for more than 2 weeks, with 
loss of weight/no weight gain and
•	history of contact with a suspected or diagnosed case of active 
TB disease within the last 2 years
Mode of spread: TB is spread from one person to another through 
the air, often when an infected person coughs or sneezes. TB 
spreads rapidly, especially in areas where people are living in crowded conditions, have poor 
access to health care and/or are malnourished. A person can contract bovine tuberculosis, 
another variety of TB by consuming raw milk from infected cattle.
Disease prevention: Vaccination with Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine as per the 
schedule will prevent serious forms of childhood tuberculosis.
2. Hepatitis B 
Hepatitis B is caused by a virus that affects the liver. 90 percent of infants who get infected 
during birth or before one year of age develop chronic disease. It is a highly infectious disease 
(50-100 times more infectious than HIV) and is the leading cause of jaundice, chronic liver 
disease or primary liver cancer.
DISEASES PREVENTED BY VACCINATIONDiseases prevented 
by vaccination 
 
Figure. 4.1: Childhood 
Tuberculosis case

32Recognition of the disease: An acute illness typically including yellowish discolouration of 
eyes and skin, dark yellow colored urine, loss of appetite, generalized weakness, letharginess 
and pain in right upper abdomen.
Mode of spread: The disease spreads through contact with infected blood or other body 
fluids in various situations: 
a) from mother to child during birth
b) through unsafe injections and/or transfusions, or needle stick accidents with infected blood
c) contact with infected person with cuts, scrapes, bites and/or scratches
d) from person to person during sexual intercourse
Disease prevention: By vaccinating children with Hepatitis B vaccine birth dose within 24 
hrs of birth and completing the Pentavalent vaccine (which also contains Hep B vaccine) dose 
schedule as per the immunization schedule.
3. Poliomyelitis 
Poliomyelitis, or polio, is a highly infectious disease caused by 
poliovirus types 1, 2 or 3. It mainly affects children of less than 
five years of age. One in 100 to 1000 infections causes irreversible 
paralysis when the virus attacks the spinal cord nerve cells that 
control the muscles.
India continues to be polio free since 2011. It is important that 
all eligible children receive polio vaccinations during routine 
immunization and polio campaigns until the world is polio free.
Recognition of the disease: Sudden onset of weakness and 
looseness in any part of the body in a child less than 15 years of age 
or paralysis in a person of any age in whom polio is suspected.
Mode of spread: Polio is transmitted by faeco-oral route. In areas with poor sanitation, it 
enters the body through the mouth when people eat food or drink water that is contaminated 
with faeces.
Disease prevention: Vaccination with the oral polio vaccine (OPV) and inactivated polio 
vaccine (IPV) administered as per the immunization schedule.
Importance of reporting AFP cases: As the world is not yet polio free, it is important that all 
AFP cases be reported even though India is polio free. Surveillance for polio must continue to 
ensure that we are able to detect cases if they occur.
4. Diphtheria  
Diphtheria is caused by the toxin producing bacterium ( Corynebacterium diphtheriae ). 
Diphtheria is an infectious disease that commonly affects the throat and the tonsils, forming 
a membrane that can lead to obstructed breathing and death. 
 
Figure. 4.2: Polio caseDISEASES PREVENTED BY VACCINATION

33Recognition of the disease: An illness of the upper respiratory 
tract characterized by the following: 
laryngitis (hoarseness of voice, cough) or nasopharyngitis 
(running nose, nasal congestion and sneezing) or pharyngitis 
(fever with pain and redness of throat) or tonsillitis (fever, pain 
and enlarged red tonsils) or neck swelling (bull-neck) 
AND 
adherent membranes of tonsils, pharynx and/or nose 
Mode of spread: Diphtheria spreads easily between people by direct contact with an infected 
person or through respiratory droplets in air, like from coughing or sneezing.
Disease prevention: Giving diphtheria containing vaccines - Pentavalent, DPT boosters and 
Td boosters as per the immunization schedule is the most effective method of prevention.
5. Pertussis (whooping cough) 
Pertussis or whooping cough is a disease of the respiratory 
tract caused by Bordetella pertussis  bacteria that live 
in mouth, nose and throat. It is highly communicable 
disease characterized by repeated cough that may lead 
to pneumonia and other complications leading to death 
especially in infants and young children.
Recognition of the disease: a person of any age with a 
cough lasting for >=2 weeks, or of any duration in an infant 
or any person in an outbreak setting, without a more 
likely diagnosis and with at least one of the following on 
observation or parental report:
• paroxysms (fits of coughing)
• inspiratory whooping
• post-tussive vomiting (vomiting immediately after coughing) or vomiting without other 
apparent causes
• Apnoea in infants (<1 year of age)
• clinician suspects pertussis
Mode of spread: Pertussis spreads very easily from person to person in droplets produced 
from an infected person. 
Disease prevention: Giving pertussis containing vaccines - Pentavalent and DPT boosters as 
per the immunization schedule.
6. Tetanus 
Tetanus: Tetanus is an acute infectious disease caused by the bacterium Clostridium tetani 
spores. The spores are found everywhere in the environment, particularly in soil, ash, 
intestinal tracts/ feces of animals and humans, and on the surfaces of skin and rusty tools like 
nails, needles, barbed wire, etc. 
 
Figure. 4.3: Diphtheria case
Figure. 4.4: Pertussis case
 
DISEASES PREVENTED BY VACCINATION

34Anyone can get tetanus, but the disease is prevalent 
and serious in newborn babies and pregnant women 
who have not been sufficiently immunized with 
tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccines. Tetanus during 
pregnancy or within 6 weeks of the end of pregnancy 
is called maternal tetanus, and tetanus within the 
first 28 days of life is called neonatal tetanus.
Recognition of the disease: Any neonate with a 
normal ability to suck and cry during the first 2 days 
of life, and who thereafter cannot suck normally from 
3 to 28 days of age and becomes stiff or has convulsions/spasms (jerking of the muscles), or 
both. 
or
Any neonate who died of an unknown cause during the first month of life
Mode of spread: Tetanus is not transmitted from person to person. In people of all ages, the 
spores of bacteria can enter a wound or cut from items such as dirty nails, dirty tools used 
during childbirth, or deep puncture wounds from animal bites.
In newborn babies, infection can occur when delivery occurs on dirty mats or floors, a dirty 
tool is used to cut the umbilical cord, dirty material is used to dress the cord or when the 
hands of the person delivering the baby are not clean.
Disease prevention: By giving tetanus-containing Pentavalent vaccine, DPT booster and 
Td to children and adolescents, and Td vaccine to pregnant women as per the National 
Immunization Schedule. 
7. Haemophilus infuenzae type b disease 
Haemophilus influenzae  is a bacterium found commonly in the nose and throat of children. 
Hib can lead to severe pneumonia and meningitis in children aged less than 5 years.
Recognition of the disease: Clinical signs and symptoms of pneumonia include fever, chills, 
cough, rapid breathing and chest wall retractions. Children with meningitis can have fever, 
headache, avoidance and intolerance to bright light , neck stiffness and sometimes confusion 
or disturbed consciousness.
Mode of spread: The disease spreads from person to person through the droplets released 
from an infectious person during sneezing and coughing. Healthy children carrying the 
bacteria in their noses and throats can also infect others.
Disease prevention: By vaccinating children with Hib vaccine (contained in Pentavalent 
vaccine) as per the immunization schedule, we can prevent Hib infection and its complications. 
8. Rotavirus diarrhea 
Rotavirus diarrhea is a highly infectious diarrhoeal disease caused by rotavirus infecting the 
small intestines. It causes severe diarrhoea in infants and young children. Infants between 
three and 12 months of age may die due to severe dehydration.Figure. 4.5: Neonatal Tetanus case
 DISEASES PREVENTED BY VACCINATION

35Recognition of the disease: Clinical symptoms and signs range from mild loose stools to 
large volume watery stools and vomiting leading to rapid dehydration.
Mode of spread: The disease spreads via contaminated food, water and objects through 
faeco-oral route.
Disease prevention: By vaccinating children with Rotavirus vaccine as per the immunization 
schedule. Remember to give oral rehydration solution (ORS) and ZINC during diarrhoea.
9. Pneumococcal disease 
Pneumococcal disease is a group of diseases caused by a bacterium Streptococcus  
pneumoniae  (also known as pneumococcus). The most serious form of bacterial diseases 
are pneumonia, meningitis, and blood stream infections. Streptococcus pneumoniae  is the 
leading cause of bacterial pneumonia in children under 5 years of age.
Diseases caused by pneumococcus: include: 
• Bacterial Pneumonia
• Bacteraemia, sepsis: bloodstream infection
• Bacterial meningitis: infection of the membranes and fluid that covers and protects the 
spinal cord and brain
• Middle ear infection (otitis media-ear pain and discharge) 
• Sinusitis, Bronchitis (chest infection)
Mode of spread: Pneumococcus spreads from person to person (coughing, sneezing or 
close contact). Healthy carriers may harbour pneumococcus in their nasopharynx for days 
or weeks.
Risk group for of pneumococcal disease: Young children and elderly individuals are most at 
risk. The children most at risk of pneumococcal disease are: 
• Children under 5 years of age, especially those under 2 years of age 
• Immunocompromised children (children with reduced immunity to fight diseases)
• Those with influenza or other respiratory virus infections can get a secondary infection 
with pneumococcus
• Malnutrition, lack of breastfeeding, exposure to indoor smoke and crowded living 
conditions
• Poor and low-income group populations with poor access to health care
Disease prevention: By vaccinating children with PCV vaccine as per the immunization 
schedule.
10. Measles and Rubella 
Measles is a highly infectious disease caused by a virus. It is an important cause of death 
among children who are poorly nourished, un- & partially vaccinated and living in crowded 
conditions. Complications include dehydration due to severe diarrhoea, malnutrition, ear 
pain/discharge, pneumonia/chest infection, blindness and encephalitis (brain infection).
Rubella is generally a mild disease in children but when infection occurs in early pregnancy,  
it has the potential to cause spontaneous abortions, death of baby in womb, dead-born baby, 
DISEASES PREVENTED BY VACCINATION

36and serious birth defects (congenital rubella syndrome – CRS) in 
the child causing lifelong disabilities.
Recognition of the disease: Any person with fever and 
maculopapular rash (flat or slightly raised from the skin).
Mode of spread: The virus is spread through nose and throat 
secretions of infected people and in airborne droplets released 
when an infected person sneezes or coughs.
Disease prevention: By vaccinating children with Measles/  
Rubella  vaccine as per the immunization schedule. Children  
till 5 years of age, who missed any dose of MR vaccine should be 
given the missed dose so as to complete two doses of MR vaccine.
11. Japanese Encephalitis
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is an infection of the brain caused by a virus. It is prevalent in 
certain geographical areas in some of the states. JE 
is fatal in 20-30% of cases, with young children (less 
than 10 years) having a greater risk of severe disease 
and death.
Recognition of the disease:  A person of any age, 
at any time of the year with acute onset of fever 
not more than 5-7 days duration, associated with 
change in mental status (may include irritability, 
somnolence (excess sleeping) or abnormal behavior 
greater than that seen with usual febrile illness) 
                              and/ or
new onset of seizures (excluding simple febrile seizures). 
Mode of spread: JE virus is spread by mosquitoes. The virus normally infects birds and 
domestic animals, especially pigs, which serve as its reservoirs. Humans may contract the 
disease when a mosquito that has bitten an infected animal then bites a person.
Disease prevention: By vaccinating children with JE vaccine as per the immunization 
schedule. JE vaccine is being given only in identified JE endemic districts of the country.  Figure. 4.8: Japanese Encephalitis case
 
Figure. 4.7: Measles case
 DISEASES PREVENTED BY VACCINATION

37Routine Immunization
MicroplanningUnit 5

38Key contents Page
5.1. RI microplanning – Importance 39
5.2. Components of an RI microplan at subcenter or ANM area level 40
5.3. Frequency of major activities for RI microplanning process 40
5.4. Process/ steps of Microplanning 41
5.5. Overview and utility of RI microplanning formats
5.6. Alternate Vaccine Delivery
5.7. Coverage of DPT-booster 2 and Td 10 & Td 16 in schools and 
community level80
5.8. Planning in High Risk areas 81Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, Health worker should be able:
• To list the components and steps involved in developing RI micro-
plans
• To describe the utility of formats in RI micro-planning
• To guide HWs to prepare SC or ANM area micro-plans including maps 
of their catchment area
• To review and update the RI micro-plan to include all HRAs
• To understand the process of development of microplan for DPT 
Booster-2, Td vaccination

395.1. RI microplanning – Importance
Routine Immunization (RI) microplanning is the basis for ensured delivery of RI services to a 
community. The availability of updated and complete microplans at a subcenter/ ANM area 
(urban/rural) demonstrates preparedness of the health institute and indicates the quality of 
services provided.
Purpose of RI microplan:
•	Define the catchment area and population covered by each SC / urban ANM Area
•	Identify HRAs both migratory and settled HRAs 
•	Listing & Tracking of Beneficiaries to Reduce dropouts and left outs
•	Ensuring rational workload distribution and session planning to cover the beneficiaries in 
the catchment area to increase the RI coverage  
•	Plan and improve the supervision
•	Better utilization of human resources as well as vaccine and logistics     
•	Strengthen capacity to use data for action
Levels of RI microplanning process:
Microplanning process should start at the Sub Centre (SC)/ Urban ANM area level. Microplans 
from the subcentres are compiled to prepare the PHC/ UPHC microplan. Information from 
PHCs/ UPHCs is consolidated at the district or may be at the block/ taluk/ zone and then to 
the district level in some states. Fig 5.1 shows the RI microplanning from subcentre/ ANM 
area to the district and to the state level.
State UT
District / City
Taluk / CHC / Block / Zone
Primary Health Centre / Urban Primary Health Centre
Sub-centre /Urban ANM area
Fig. 5.1. Levels of RI microplanning process 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNINGRoutine Immunization 
Microplanning

405.2 Components of an RI microplan at subcenter or ANM area level
An RI microplan at the subcentre or ANM area level should have the following components:
a) Master list of the area – Includes names of all villages and urban areas (hamlets / tolas / 
/wards/ sub-ward/ mohalla/ sector/ HRAs, etc.)
 High Risk Areas (HRAs) both migratory and settled HRAs form an important 
component of the master list of the areas for preparing RI-Microplan
b) Area map showing names of villages and urban areas (including all hamlets / tola, 
sector, mohalla and hard to reach areas, HRAs) 
c) Demarcation Map  – Clearly define areas for each ANM and if more than 1 ANM are 
posted, their area should be clearly demarcated. It should show the exact boundaries 
and areas for each ASHAs/ AWWs/ other mobilizers
d) Estimation of beneficiaries  (who has to be vaccinated and with which antigen)
e) Estimation of vaccines and logistics  (for each planned session)
f) ANM work / roster plan  including mobilization plan  
 High Risk Areas (HRAs) and urban areas form an important component of the master 
list of the areas for preparing RI-Microplan.
5.3 Frequency of major activities for RI microplanning process
Table no. 5.1. Frequency of major activities for RI microplanning process
Frequency Activity
Annually Prepare/ update RI microplan
•	list all areas (all villages, hamlets (tola), sub villages, urban and peri 
urban areas, mohalla, hard to reach areas, etc. ) including HRAs in the 
master list and map them
•	conduct house to house survey for head counting of beneficiaries – 
pregnant women and children below 5 years (to be repeated every 6 
months)
•	plan RI sessions - community need based, and demand driven  
•	calculate vaccine and logistics 
•	preparation of Supervisory plan, AVD Plan, ANM Roster, communication, 
BMW management and Contingency plan
Half yearly House to house survey for head counting  of beneficiaries:
•	repeat the house-to-house survey after six months to update the 
beneficiaries 
•	identify new areas, validate HRAs by supervisors/ medical officers 
Quarterly Review and update 
•	Review and update the microplans to address the emerging situations. 
eg. community needs, vacant subcenters, new migratory HRAs
•	preparation of Supervisory plan, AVD Plan and ANM Roster
Monthly Session due list review at SC /ANM area: ANM should
•	Review due cum tally sheet of all the sessions held in the previous 
month.
•	Update coverage report & monitoring chart and list out the left outs, 
dropouts 
•	Report the challenges in vaccination coverage to MO and plan to 
address them ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

41Weekly Update session due list after every session
After every RI session with the help of ASHA/AWW/ MAS/ other mobilizers, 
ANM should: 
•	Identify all the missed children by reviewing the previous session due 
list tally sheet and include them in the next due list, including newborns 
and pregnant women
•	Plan to mobilize all eligible beneficiaries to the immunization session 
sites 
5.4 Process/ steps of RI Microplanning
RI Microplans should be prepared annually based on actual head count survey and it should 
be reviewed every   quarter. However, the process is dynamic, requiring regular reviews and 
updation based on the community needs and available resources to plan for effective delivery 
of immunization services to reach all the beneficiaries including HRAs.
The steps in the process of developing RI microplan are shown in Fig. no.5.2 
Fig. 5.2. Snapshot of steps for RI micro-plan developing process 
STEP 5
Finalization  
PHC/UPHC microplanSTEP 4
Review &  
consolidation of SC/ 
ANM area microplanSTEP 3
Head count
survey in all urban 
and rural areaSTEP 2
Sub-center/ ANM 
area planningSTEP 1
Block PHC/UPHC 
meeting
Review and 
finalization of SC/ 
ANM area microplan
SC/ ANM area final 
due list 
Develop PHC/UPHC 
RI microplansReview of field 
formats
Review SC/ ANM area 
master list
Develop dra/f_t SC/ 
ANM area RI 
microplanConducting head 
count survey in all 
areas including HRAsPlanning for head 
count survey
training of surveyors 
for head count 
surveySensitization 
meeting with ANMs/ 
ASHAs
Subcentre ANM RI 
microplan review 
meeting
The activities for RI microplan preparation should preferably be initiated on 1st working day 
of February and the Head count survey should be done meticulously and completed by end 
of February. Head Count survey should not be done on RI days. The microplan updation at 
PHC/UPHC level should be completed by mid of March. This should be followed by microplan 
review at Block and District level before the submission of the plan from district to state. The 
RI microplan are expected to be operational from 1st April of every year. Refer Gantt chart for 
suggested timelines and steps involved (Fig. No. 5.3).
The microplanning formats are essential to enlist all the catchment areas and to plan adequate 
immunization services. All the sessions planned for a month as per ANM rosters should be entered on 
U-WIN.  For example, if 38 sessions are planned on a RI day in a PHC/Block, then all these 38 sessions 
should be scheduled and conducted on U-WIN. Ensure that all the sessions planned in HRAs including 
hard to reach areas through RI microplanning process should be reflected in U-WIN. Eg. If 5 sessions are 
planned in HRAs, the same has to be reflected in U-WIN.
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

42Fig 5.3: Proposed timeline of activities in RI microplanning – 
 12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728123456789101112131415
PHC / UPHC meeting - Sensitization meeting for ANMs and other 
health staﬀ  (Step 1)
PHC/ UPHC meeting - ANM RI micro-plan review meeting and 
area demarcation planning (Step 1)
SC/ ANM area planning meeting - for planning head count survey  
and training of all surveyors for Head count survey (Step2)
Conducting house to house head count survey without leaving 
any house (Step 3)
Field validation
SC/ ANM area meeting -review of all formats & preparing  draft 
RI micro-plan (Step 4)
PHC/ UPHC  meeting - SC / Urban ANM area micro-plan 
ﬁnalization with ANMs  and submission of ﬁnal plan (Step 5)
PHC / UPHC : Final review of consolidated plan and followed by 
submission to block & district DIO (Step 5)Activities for developing RI micro-plans (Urban/ Rural)  March February
Note:  This Gantt chart is indicative of average time needed for important activities in developing RI micro-plan. The Urban areas may require additional resources and time.  ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

43Step-1 Block/PHC/UPHC meeting – Sensitization and review of existing microplans
Step 1 involves two meetings:
A. Sensitization meeting of ANMs and other staff to plan for Head count survey 
B. ANM wise RI microplan review meeting
A. Sensitization meeting chaired by MO to prepare master list of areas to plan for Head 
count survey
 
Purpose: During this sensitization meeting, health workers are sensitized on: 
•	Microplan process and utilization of different RI forms (ref. table no.5.3 and Fig. no.5.26)  
•	Planning for head count survey (filling form SC-1 & SC-2)
o preparation of master list of areas under each SC/ ANM area by including all 
villages and their hamlets, tolas; Urban/peri-urban areas and their wards/sub wards/
mohallas; HRAs in the master list (Form SC-1). This is the most important activity.
o Area demarcation 
o Details of HRAs must be shown in a separate row in Form SC-1
	Roles and responsibilities of health workers
At the end of this meeting,  MO would schedule the date of ANM review meeting and finalize 
training dates of surveyors
B. ANM RI micro-plan review meeting 
This meeting would be conducted by MO PHC/ UPHC (in small batches of 2 or 3 ANMs) to 
finalize the: 
•	Area demarcation for each subcentre and ANM area 
•	Master list of all areas for each sub centre in Form SC-1 
•	Plan for conducting house to house survey for each Sub centre/ ANM area 
•	Timeline for conducting the house-to-house survey / head counting
Preparation for the review meeting
The ANM should work with ASHAs and AWWs of her area to generate the village list for her 
SC/ ANM area. Use the following sources of information for listing of areas and beneficiaries 
(Medical officer has to ensure all the sources are available).
Table 5.2 Sources of information for listing of areas and beneficiaries
Information / 
Data Sources of information 
Geographic List and map of all villages including hamlets, all urban area, wards, 
mohallas, HRAs, etc.
Sources: Health, Revenue, ICDS departments., Urban local bodies, slum 
boards, Swachh Bharat Mission, etc.
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

44Demographic Total population (Census/ revenue records) and number of target 
beneficiaries –head count survey, ANC registration, Expected Level of 
Achievement (ELA), target given by district/ block
ICDS survey data of 0 -6 years children and pregnant women registers, 
etc.
Programmatic Latest microplans of RI, Polio, MR campaign, Intensified Mission 
Indradhanush, VHSND/ UHND microplans 
Administrative Human resource available and vacancy status 
Epidemiologic VPD surveillance and outbreak data
Stakeholders ICDS, Education and other line departments
Community representatives, Local Influencers, Local practitioners, 
NGOs, Development partners, etc.
Plan to address few important questions which are given below: 
	Are all areas identified and included in 
the SC/ ANM area plan? 
	Are there areas/villages with large 
population? 
	Border/peri-urban areas, new 
settlements, unauthorized colonies? 
	Where are the unreached populations? 
o Areas with highest number of 
unimmunized children 
o Areas with mobile/migrant 
populations
o Construction sites 
o Areas with resistance, vaccine 
hesitancy, vaccine avoidance 
behaviour 	Where are the hard-to-reach populations? 
o Low coverage areas 
o Accessibility compromised areas
	Are there problems with access to 
immunization services? 
o Catchment area with Penta 1 coverage 
of < 90%
o Catchment areas with Penta 3 / MR 2 is 
<90%
	Where is utilization of services low? 
o Areas with dropouts >10%
o Areas needing flexible timing?  (Eg. 
Urban areas, harvest season, etc.)
Overview of RI microplanning formats:
A set of formats for RI microplanning at SC/ ANM area level are explained in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3. RI microplanning formats and utility
RI Forms Form No. Utility
MASTER LIST AND 
MAPPING FORMS
to be filled by ANM 
with support of ASHAs/ 
AWWs/ other mobilizersSC-1 Master list of all villages and their hamlets, tolas; 
Urban/peri-urban areas and their wards/sub wards/
mohallas; HRAs (migratory and non-migratory 
settlements in each sub centre / ANM area
SC-2 Sub centre / ANM area mapROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

45HEAD COUNT SURVEY 
FORMS
to be filled by surveyor 
(ASHA, AWWs, Link 
worker, other surveyors SC-3 Provides total number of households and target 
beneficiaries’ - pregnant women and all children in the 
age group of 0 to 2 years, 2-5 years (Children who have 
missed MR 1, MR2, DPT , OPV and JE vaccines) in the 
area
SC-4A List of pregnant women - vaccination status and ANC 
visits
SC-4B  List of children upto 2 years including new borns with 
vaccination status 
SC-4C List of children b/w 2-5 missed for due vaccine doses 
(Children who have missed MR 1, MR2, DPT , OPV and 
JE vaccine)
SUB CENTRE 
PLANNING FORMS
to be filled by ANMSC-5 RI session beneficiary due list (which gets updated 
after each session)
SC-6 RI session plan 
SC-7 Injection load and vaccine distribution plan 
SC-8 Estimation of vaccines and logistics
SC-9 ANM work plan / roster
SC-10 Communication plan 
1. Master list of all areas and head count survey planning in Sub-centre / ANM area (Form 
SC-1) 
Master list of Sub-centre / ANM area and head count survey planning is the most important 
step in preparation of RI microplan. Form SC-1 is to be used by the ANM to list the areas in the 
sub centre / ANM area including HRAs in separate rows. This activity needs coordination with 
ASHA / AWW or Community representatives (Panchayat Raj Institution (PRI)/ ward members, 
religious leaders, etc.) and local influencers and also by referring to the sources of information 
available in table no.5.2. The names of local influencers with their phone number should be 
noted down area wise. (Refer SOPs for details).
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

46Fig. no. 5.4: Sub-center/ANM Area Master List and Survey Planning Form: SC-1 (Refer Annexure 2.1)
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

47SOP for filling Form SC-1(refer fig no. 5.4):
Column A - Serial numbers are to be allotted to each area. Numbers are not to be repeated   
and must be in serial for one sub-centre area/ ANM area. If the areas per sub-centre/ ANM 
area need to be entered      on more than one sheet, the numbering will continue until the last 
area for that sub-centre/ ANM area.
Column B- Ensure all the Villages / Hamlets / Tolas / High Risk Areas (HRAs) details are 
entered. The classification of the HRAs is mentioned at the bottom of format, relevant number 
to be entered in brackets along with the name of HRA.
o For HRAs, (including brick kilns or nomadic/construction sites) each site must be entered 
into a separate row. Refer to existing polio microplans, census lists, maps, high risk area 
lists, and interactions with ASHA / AWW or Panchayat Raj Institution (PRI) members to 
ensure the inclusion of all areas in the sub centre area. This will form the master list for 
each sub centre/ ANM area. This is a critical step in preparation of microplan. Update 
this format as information is received or every quarter
Column C – Enter the number of households as per information available. If information is 
not available, an approximate number can be entered. For areas, such as nomadic sites and 
brick kilns, household numbers are important, or approximations must be entered.
Column D, if the entered area is an HRA then encircle “Y”.
Column E, Mention the HRA code mentioned below the format. The different types of HRA 
code: 1 = Slums with migration; 2 = Nomads; 3 - Brick kiln; 4 - Construction site; 5 - Other 
migratory high-risk areas (fishermen villages, riverine areas with shifting populations, 
migrants in tea/coffee estates, etc.); 6A- Settled Slums (notified & non-notified); 6B- Hard to 
Reach Area; 6C- Areas under Vacant / temporarily vacant (More than 3 months) sub centres;  
6D- Areas with Measles/Rubella outbreaks or cases of Diphtheria, Pertussis, Neonatal tetanus 
in last 3 years; 6E-Areas with vaccine hesitancy/ refusal; 6F-Other settled high-risk areas.
Column F, Enter the name of the ASHA / AWW/ mobilizer responsible for the area.
Column G, the name and contact number of the person who will conduct the survey should 
be entered. If the area does not have an ASHA or the position is vacant then, name of the 
person who will be delegated to should be entered.
Column H, Designation of the surveyor has to be entered. Survey can be done by the 
local AWW / link worker / others in consultation with the Medical Officer (MO) ONLY after 
undergoing training.
Column I, Surveyor should complete 25-30 households in an ideal rural area; in urban and 
densely populated areas the number may be more; fewer houses to be covered in remote 
hard to reach areas . The area survey is to be completed as mentioned in Gantt chart (Refer 
Fig. No. 5.3). The dates for conducting this activity and the persons who will conduct the 
survey will be decided by the ANM in consultation with the MO. The survey starts and end 
dates are to be entered here.
Column J, mention the name and contact number of local influencers of each of the areas 
enlisted
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

48Columns K-R,  The last shaded columns are for use by the ANM incharge AFTER the survey 
to enter total population, number of beneficiaries.
After survey, total number of all beneficiaries- pregnant women, children between 0-2 
years and children between 2-5 years with missed MR1, MR2, DPT , JE & OPV doses are to 
be documented in Form SC-1.
2. Sub-centre / ANM area map (Form SC-2) 
This form provides space for drawing a map of the SC area. A sample map is also given, and 
health workers are encouraged to put forward simple drawings. The maps should be able to 
show at least the following:
• Names of all the villages/hamlets/mohalla in the area
• Shading of parts of a village/area to demarcate the ASHAs areas
• Location of the SC/PHC/UPHC and cold-chain point
• Location of all RI session sites
• Location of cold-chain point
• Major roads
• Rivers streams/Hilly area
• High Risk areas
• AEFI management center
• Private health sector providing vaccination (in urban areas) 
Purpose of maps is to 
•	understand the actual geography of the sub centre/ ANM area. Maps of all the subcentres/ 
ANM areas put together should reflect the entire catchment area of the PHC/ UPHC 
•	clearly demarcate the villages/ urban localities for implementing RI services and avoid 
overlap/ confusion of areas
•	guide health workers to reach all beneficiaries and type of session suitable for each village 
or urban area 
Preparation of maps:
To prepare good maps, the health worker may refer the already existing maps available from 
the previous microplan.  For this purpose, the health worker may also refer other sources of 
information like:
•	Polio, MR or other vaccination campaign microplan maps
•	Maps from local administration, e.g. municipal corporation, land department, election 
commission, local panchayat, etc.
•	google maps (Ref. Fig no.5.7)
•	Local area maps from any other sources
Plan for walk through of areas to ensure clear area demarcation to ensure the border areas 
included in the respective subcenter/ ANM areaROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

49Fig. No. 5.5: Sub Center / ANM Area Map Form SC-2 (refer annexure 2.2):
Sub-centre Map showing Sub-Centers/ANM area, Session sites, AVD, High Risk areas &  AEFI management center
Signa ture of ANM                                                                               Signa ture of MOSub cent re / ANM area map  
SUB CENTRE MAP
PHC
Signature of ANM____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ___ Signature of Medical Oﬃcer:_____________________Village DVillage BVillage C
Village FVillage A
Village EASHA Y
River
Tola E1
Tola E2RI  Form 2
Villa ge AForm SC- 2
Religious place
AEFI man agem ent centre 
HRAs      RIVE R
LAKE  / PON D
OTHERS
Signa ture of ANM                                                                               Signa ture of MOSub cent re / ANM area map  
Scho ol Private RI SessionRI session  siteLEGEND
PHC/UPHC
SUB CE NTRE
VILLAGES HQ
ROAD
RAILWAY  LINE
RI
P
S
1-5 & 6A-6FPSUB CENTRE MAP
PHC
Signature of ANM____ ____ ____ ____ ____ ___ Signature of Medical Oﬃcer:_____________________Village DVillage BVillage C
Village FVillage A
Village EASHA Y
River
Tola E1
Tola E2
RI  Form 2District/  Corporatio n: ________________ Blo ck/Urban area:  ________________ PHC/ UPHC: ______________  Sub-centre/ ANM area: ___________
Fig.No.5.6: Sample map showing area demarcation in rural area: 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING
 


50Fig.No.5.7: Sample map showing area demarcation in urban area:
Fig.No.5.8: Sample map showing area demarcation in urban area with mapping of 
session sites – fixed, outreach and private vaccination centres
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

51Step-2Head count survey planning and training of surveyors 
(ASHA/AWW/Link worker/other surveyor)
Purpose:  ANM to guide the ASHAs and AWWs of the area to conduct the head count survey to 
effectively identify all beneficiaries in the community.
Fig. 5.9. Sub centre/ ANM area survey planning meeting– personnel and activities
ASHA
AWW
Link
Worker/SurveyorSC survey
planning
meetingACTIVITIES
•Area listing
•Area demarcation
•Training
•Walk through
•Head count/survey
Key components of this training are:
•	Review area demarcation and assign the areas from master list to carryout head count 
survey
•	create working maps for each area including map for vacant ANM areas also
•	Training of surveyors to undertake head count and prepare beneficiary list
Venue: 
•	At PHC/UPHC for 2 to 3 Sub centres/ ANM areas in batches (about 15 to 20 ASHA/AWW/Link 
workers in each batch), OR
•	At the Sub centre/ ANM area
Responsibility: Medical officer or Health supervisor/ LHV  
Participants for this training: ANM, ICDS supervisor, ASHAs, ASHA facilitator, AWWs, Link 
Workers, other mobilizers
Preparations for head count survey-planning meeting
•	Surveyors should bring the information on list of villages/ urban localities including HRAs 
with number of households and population of their area
•	Encourage surveyors to identify any new areas that may not have been included or any 
new migratory HRAs
•	Cross check and make corrections in the master list, if any
•	plan logistics for survey – adequate number of formats (Forms SC-3,4A,4B, 4C); chalk for 
house marking
On meeting day
The MO/ health supervisor needs to discuss the status of RI coverage and challenges in 
their area and explain the importance of RI microplanning. 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

52Agenda/ Discussion points: 
a) Area demarcation between ASHA, AWW, link worker:
o Ask each ASHA/link worker to readout the list of villages/urban areas in her area. Cross 
check with the list available with AWWs. In urban areas, discuss with MAS, community 
representatives, local influencers and others for listing of areas
 ANM to identify areas requiring a walk-through to verify demarcation and inclusion of 
all HRAs in the list
o ANM to finalize the surveyors (ASHAs, AWWs, Link workers and others) for head count 
survey and fix the dates (exclude RI days) as per the workload for completing the 
survey (25 to 30 households per day) for ensuring quality. Refer to Polio house to 
house microplans for this survey
o Distribute copies of Forms SC-3, 4A ,4B and 4C to each ASHA/AWW/ Surveyor. Explain 
the process (use SOPs of  each form)
b) Create a simple map for each area before the head count survey: During the survey, 
details may be added to this map
c) Plan for walk through of areas to ensure clear area demarcation/HRA identification: 
o MO/Supervisor/ ANM should visit and walk-through high priory areas, urban, periurban 
and border areas for demarcation with support from other line department officials, 
community representatives, local influencers, etc.
d) Prepare a plan to monitor the head count survey
Outputs expected:
o Completeness of master list of areas and survey planning form (Form SC-1)
o Simple area maps for each survey area
Roles and responsibilities:
Personnel Activities to be performed Supervisor
ANM • Area demarcation for ASHAs/AWWs
• Develop a reasonable timeline for survey
• Will support the ASHA/AWW for survey
• Supervise the survey with field visitsSector 
MO/LHV/ 
designated 
ANM/ CHO
ASHA • Contribute to finalizing the master list
• Conduct the house-to-house surveySC ANM/ASHA
facilitator
AWW • Conduct/assist in the house-to-house survey
• Identify beneficiaries/HRAs/missed areas/ dropouts/left outsSC ANM/LS
Step-3 Conducting head count survey at village /ward
The head count survey or house-to-house survey is the most important step of RI microplanning 
process. The objective of the headcount survey is to reach the entire population and list out 
all target beneficiaries (pregnant women, children 0-2 years and children between 2-5 years 
missed the due vaccines/ doses of MR, OPV, DPT including boosters). It has to be conducted 
by trained ASHA/AWW/Link worker/surveyor.  This activity should be monitored to ensure 
quality and completeness.ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

53Key activities to be conducted:
The key activities to be conducted are as follows:
Preparations for head count survey:
o ANM should ensure that the trained surveyors conduct the survey and necessary logistics 
like forms, map, chalks etc are available
o All queries raised by surveyors must be answered clearly; they must be motivated to visit 
all the areas and NOT to leave out any beneficiary during the HCS 
o ANM should take support from community representatives (PRI/ ward members, etc.), 
other influencers before the survey and support the surveyors 
During the survey 
o A maximum of 25 to 30 households should be 
covered per day in an ideal rural areas; in urban 
and densely populated areas the number may be 
more; fewer houses to be covered in remote hard 
to reach areas
o cover all the households in the area in a 
systematic way. Refer Polio house to house 
microplan for assistance, if needed
At each house:
o Greet the family and explain the purpose of visit
o document the details of first house owner and 
last house owner for the day
o information of ALL households to be entered in house-to-house survey form (Form SC-3)
o If the team identifies target beneficiries, their details with vaccination status (as per 
MCP/ RI card) is entered in the relevant form as per table 5.4.
Table. No. 5.4: House to house survey forms used by surveyor:
House to house 
survey formsTarget beneficiary details & completeness of Head Count survey
SC-4A List of pregnant women - vaccination status and ANC visits
SC-4B List of children upto 2 years including newborn with vaccination status 
SC-4C List of children between 2-5 years who have missed due vaccine doses 
of MR, DPT or booster doses
House marking should be done with chalk/geru indicating the serial No of the household and 
date of survey, as shown in Fig. 5.10Target beneficiaries:  pregnant women 
and newborns (0-1 month); children 1 
-11 months; 1-2 years; children between 
2-5 years who have missed the due 
vaccination doses
“A household is defined on the basis of 
“Kitchen“or “Chullah” (like if a family 
has brothers living in one house but 
has separate chulla, then house hold 
marking has to be based on chullas just 
like in polio microplans)
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

54Fig. 5.10. House marking during house-to-house survey for RI
RI-15
12-02-2024Household number
Date of head count 
surveyArrow indicating survey 
team movement
This survey should not be done on RI days and may be completed in 7 to 10 days.
Fig.5.11. Flow chart of Head count survey documentation in formats
Children 0-5 years
&
Pregnant women in
form-3Pregnant women
(Full/partial/unvaccinated)Pregnant women
Survey listing form-4A
Children Survey listing
form-4B
Children b/w 2-5 years with
missed vaccination Survey
listing form 4CChildren b/w 2-5 years
(Partial/unvaccinated)Children 0-2 years
(Full/partial/unvaccinated)
Supervision:
o ANM, supervisors, field monitor should visit 5 households in the area to ensure quality 
and completeness of survey. (Ref. template for validation of head count survey)
Outputs expected:
o Completion of house-to-house survey in all the areas 
o Enlisting all target beneficiaries residing in the area              
Roles and responsibilities:
Personnel Activities to be performed Supervisor
ANM • Area demarcation for ASHAs/AWWs
• Develop a timeline for survey
• Facilitate ASHA/AWW/ Link worker/ other surveyor for 
survey
• Supervise and validate head count survey with field visitsMO/LHV/ 
Health 
supervisor
ASHA, Link 
worker, MAS, 
others• Conduct survey and fill Forms SC-3, 4A, 4B, 4C
• Identify beneficiaries/HRAs/missed areas/ dropouts/left 
outsANM/ASHA 
facilitator
AWW • Conduct survey and fill Forms SC-3,4A, 4B, 4C
• Identify beneficiaries/HRAs/missed areas/ dropouts/left 
outsANM/
LHV/ ICDS 
supervisorROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

55Fig.no. 5.12: House to house survey form: Form SC-3 (Refer Annexure 2.3)
 
Fig. no. 5.13: Head count survey of pregnant women: Form SC-4A (Refer Annexure 2.4) 
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

56SOPs for filling Form SC-3:
 Each household is to be identified by a number (Column A). This is the household 
identification number. 
o The numbering of households is to be continuous until the area is completed
o The assessment of the area may take more than one day but the numbering of the 
houses will be in serial order for the entire area
o Restart of numbering will be done when a new area is being assessed by the same person. 
o House marking should be done with chalk/geru indicating the serial No of the 
household and date of survey, as shown in Fig. 5.10.
o Interview each household and gather information on the head of household (Column 
B), name of father/ mother to be included in column C, any contact number in column 
D and the total number of members in each household (Column E). This must include 
all newborn children
o Next, enquire if there is any currently pregnant woman in this household. This does 
not depend on if she is a resident / visitor to the area. Include all pregnant women as 
each is a beneficiary. If yes, mention number (Column F) and collect information on 
the pregnant woman and enter in Form 4A
o  Similarly for Columns G, H, I, J & K enquire if there is:
o Newborn child or child up to 1 month of age, mention the number in Column G
o Child/ children between 1 month and 1 year of age, mention the number in Column H
o Child/ children between 1 and 2 years of age, mention the number in Column I
o Child/ children between 2 and 5 years of age, mention the number in Column J
o Missed child/ children between 2 and 5 years of age, mention the number in Column K
o If a child/ children is identified in any of these columns, mention the number and 
enter information on the newborn/infant/child in Form 4B and children who have 
missed MR-1/ MR-2/ DPT/ OPV/ JE including boosters in SC-4C
SOP for filling RI Form SC-4A: Head Count Survey of Pregnant Women
Form SC-4A has to be filled when a pregnant woman is identified in Form SC-3 Column F.
The number in Column A must be the same as that used to identify the household in Form 3. 
If there is more than one pregnant woman in a house, the same number will have to be 
entered for each of these Pregnant women in separate rows. This number is a unique 
number that will link the pregnant woman to the house details.
Columns B, C, D and E are for information which identifies the pregnant woman.
Column F. Enquire from the woman, if she has been issued a mother and child protection 
(MCP) card and registered in U-WIN. If she has MCP card or U-WIN reference ID, enter card 
number or U-WIN number in column F. If she does not have a card, then information should 
be shared with the ANM of the area to ensure that a card is issued to her. Also, if U-WIN 
reference ID is not available with the beneficiary, efforts should be made to check for 
U-WIN registration. If not registered, efforts should be made to register the pregnant 
woman in U-WIN.
Column G. Determine the expected date of delivery (EDD) of the child. This can be sourced 
from the RI/MCP card if available or from the mother herself. If she is unaware, then determine 
the EDD as best as possible by assessing her date of last menstrual period (LMP). (Surveyor ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

57can consult ANM who can refer to the EDD ready reckoner from RCH register/ training 
manual).
The administration of Td vaccine to PW as per the UIP schedule prevents maternal and 
neonatal tetanus; details of the same are to be entered in the three H Columns.
Antenatal check-ups help to identify a high-risk pregnancy and reduce chances of any 
complications. Details of these checks are to be entered in the four I Columns.
Column J. This is for the ANM to enter if the woman is due for any ANC or Td vaccination. 
These two columns make it easier for the ANM to extract the information and develop the 
beneficiary due list for each RI session.
The dates of administration of Td injections and ANC check-ups should ideally be obtained 
from the RI/MCP card.
SOP for filling form 4B:
Column A. The number in Column A must be the same as that used to identify the household 
in Form 3. If there is more than one child in a house, the same number will have to be 
entered for each of these children.
Columns B, C, D, E and F. These columns are used to collect identification information of 
each child. Attempt to collect the latest mobile number from the parent/household.
Column G and H - Enquire if the infant/child has been issued an RI/MCP card. If the child has 
MCP card or U-WIN reference ID, enter card number or U-WIN number in column G. If MCP 
card not available, information should be shared with the ANM of the area to ensure 
that a card is issued at the earliest. Also, if U-WIN reference ID is not available with the 
beneficiary, efforts should be made to check for U-WIN registration. If not registered, 
efforts should be made to register the child in U-WIN.
Column H- This records detail of vaccines administered at birth. Dates of administration of 
BCG, bOPV birth dose and Hepatitis B (within 24 h) are to be mentioned
Column I- Dates of administration of Penta 1, Rotavirus 1 (where applicable), PCV 1 (where 
applicable), fIPV 1 and bOPV 1
Column J- Dates of administration of Penta 2, Rotavirus 2 (where applicable) and bOPV 2
Column K- Dates of administration of Penta 3, Rotavirus 3 (where applicable), PCV 2 (where 
applicable), fIPV 3, and bOPV3
Column L- Enter the dates of administration of vaccines due between the age of 9 – 11 
months– MR first dose, Vitamin A, PCV Booster (where applicable), fIPV 3 and JE (where 
applicable) vaccines 
Column M- Record whether the child is fully immunized – encircle “Yes” or “No”. A child is to 
be considered as fully immunized plus (FIC plus) if s/he has received all due vaccines up to 1 
year of age.
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

58Column N- Dates of administration of vaccines due for a child between the ages of 1 and 2 
years are to be entered in column O. This includes MR 2, DPT-1 booster, bOPV booster dose 
and JE 2 vaccine (where applicable).
Column O- Record whether the child is completely immunized– encircle “Yes” or “No”. A child 
is to be considered as completely immunized if s/he has received all the due vaccines up to 
2 years of age.
RI Form 4C–List of children between 2-5 years missed for MR/DPT/Penta/ OPV doses
This form collates the information of list of children between 2-5 years missed for MR/DPT/
Penta/ OPV doses identified during the house-to-house survey.
SOP for filling form 4C:
Column A. The number in Column A must be the same as that used to identify the household 
in Form 3. If there is more than one child in a house, the same number will have to be 
entered for each of these children.
Columns B, C, D, E and F. These columns are used to collect identification information of 
each missed child. Attempt to collect the latest mobile number from the parent/household.
Column G - Enquire if the infant/child has been issued an RI/MCP card or have U-WIN 
reference ID. If the child has MCP card or U-WIN reference ID, enter card number or U-WIN 
number in column G.
If MCP card not available, information should be shared with the ANM of the area to 
ensure that a card is issued at the earliest. Also, if U-WIN reference ID is not available 
with the beneficiary, efforts should be ensured to check for U-WIN registration. If not 
registered, efforts should be made to register the child in U-WIN.
Columns H to Q - These columns are used to collect information on MISSED VACCINE 
DOSE/ DOSES for MR/ OPV/Penta/ DPT doses.  Encircle ‘Y’, if the child has MISSED the 
vaccine and ‘N’, if the child has RECIEVED the vaccine.
Columns R to AA - These columns are used to TRACK THE VACCINATION STATUS OF 
MISSED CHILDREN.  The missed children found during head count survey are mobilized 
to RI session for vaccination of missed dose/s. After vaccination, the date of vaccination 
of the missed dose/s is/ are to be updated in the columns (R to AA) as per vaccine dose 
received.
The details about registration of beneficiaries in U-WIN is mentioned in a separate unit no. 13.
Validation of head count survey:ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

59The assigned supervisor will cross check 5 houses and provide hands on training to rectify issues observed during head count survey. The 
head count survey validation format is placed in annexure.
Fig. no. 5.14: Head count survey of children (0-2 years): Form SC-4B (Refer Annexure 2.5)
Fig. no. 5.15. Enlistment and tracking of children between 2-5 years missed for MR/DPT/OPV/ booster doses: Form SC-4C (refer 
annexure 2.6)
 bOP
V-
Birth 
dose  BCG                          Hepat
itis B 
Birth 
dose                     bOPV1
RVV1
f IPV1
PCV 1
Penta-1
bOPV 2
RVV 2
Penta 2
bOPV 3
RVV 3
fIPV 2
PCV 2
Penta 3
fIPV3
MR 1
PCV Booster
JE 1 (elligible dists)
Vitamin A 1
bOPV Booster
MR 2
DPT Booster 1
JE 2 (elligible dists)
Vitamin A 2
A B C D E G M O
 Y/N  Y/NHouse 
No as 
in 
Form 3  Name of 
the child  Date of 
Birth 
dd/mm
/yyAge in  
months 
(comple
ted)   Gender:       
M / F Name of the 
mother/ father/ 
Gaurdian with 
mobile number                          MCP 
card  
number
/  UWIN 
ref IDVaccines at birth                            Vaccines at 6 
weeks  
F H IVaccines at 9 to 11 
months of age 
J L
Date / Y/NVaccines at 
10 weeks  Vaccines at 14 
weeks 
K
Date / Y/N Date / Y/N Date / Y/N
__ /__ 
/__M / FDate / Y/NChild is 
Fully 
immunized 
(FIC Plus)Booster and 2nd doses 
of vaccines at 16 to 23 
months of age
Child is 
completely 
immunize
d 
Date / Y/NN
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

60Fig. no. 5.16: Template for Validation of Head Count Survey (HCS) Routine Immunization  
 
Template for Validation of Head Count Survey  (HCS)  Routine Immunization 2024 
Date:   _ _ / _ _ / _ _   State/UT: ……………….…….…….  District: …………..………………..    Block/ Urban area:  …………………. ……..……… CHC/PHC/UPHC/Others: ……… ……………….……….  
Name of Planning unit: …………… ……………..  Subcenter/ ANM area:…………………….  Village/ Ward/ Mohalla:  …………………… Setting: Urban / Rural, If Urban, NUHM City: Yes/ No;  
Name of ANM/ Vaccinator…………..……………. Name of Monitor:  …………………………………………….; Organization: Govt / WHO / UNICEF / JSI / CH AI / Others (specify): ……………. …; 
Designation : ……………………..……;   
Is head count survey (HCS) conducted in this area (as per  survey plan ): Yes / No : if No  - inform MoIC, proceed to another area as per validation plan.   
Monitor to visit 5 households (HH) with at least one child due for at least one due vaccine and/or a pregnant woman and interact to elicit response .  Select HH should 
represent  the area . Find out from caregivers if surveyor/team has visited for HCS. Meet surveyor and validat e the data in HCS format. Ensure data entry in ODK tool same day.   
No. Monitoring and validation details: HH-1 HH-2 HH-3 HH-4 HH-5 
1 a. Ask family member if surveyor/team visited HH for HCS?  Yes / No  Yes / No  Yes / No  Yes / No  Yes /  No 
b. If visited, date surveyor visited this HH (from wall / family member, else NA)  __ / __/ __ / NA  __ / __/ __; UM  __ / __/ __; UM  __ / __/ __; UM  __ / __/ __; UM  
c. No. marked for this HH (From wall of HH / else consider unmarked HH (UM)  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  
2 a. Name of the head of family       
b. Mobile/landline contact number       
3 
Pregnant 
woman  a. Is there a pregnant woman found in this HH? (Select only 1 if >1)?  Y / N  Y / N  Y / N  Y / N  Y / N 
b. Name of the pregnant woman       
c. Is this PW identified in HCS  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  
4 
Children <1 year                                       
(0-11 months)  a. No. of children found in this HH by monitor as on day of HCS?       
b. No. of children found due for any vaccine  dose as on day of HCS       
c. Name(s) of children  due for any vaccine (b) to validat e with HCS format       
d. No. of children due for any vaccine but missed (c) in HCS format       
e. Name(s) of children  due for any vaccine but missed (d) in HCS format       
f. No. of children 2-11 months due for Penta -1 as on day of HCS       
g. Name(s) of children (f) due for Penta -1 for validation with HCS format       
h. No. of children due for Penta -1 but missed (g) in HCS format       
i. Name(s) of children (h) due for Penta -1 missed in HCS format       
  
 
No. Monitoring and  validatio n details: HH-1 HH-2 HH-3 HH-4 HH-5 
5 
Children 1 -2 years ( 12-23 months) a. No. of children  (12-23 months) in this HH  as on day of HCS       
b. No. of children who have not received Pentavalent-1 within  1st year of 
age (Zero  dose) as on day of HCS   
(Even if the  child has received DPT1)      
c. Name(s) of ZERO dose children (b) t o validate  with HCS format      
d. No. of children due (c) for DPT-1       
e. Na me(s) of children (d) d ue for DPT-1 to validate  with HCS  format      
f. No. of children ( e) due for DPT1 but missed in  HCS  format      
g. Name(s) of children ( f) due for DPT-1 but missed  in HCS fo rmat      
h. No. of children ( 16-23 M) found du e for DPT booster-1 as on day of HCS       
i. Name(s) of children due  for DPT booster-1 (h) to validate with HCS 
format      
j. No. of children due for DPT booster-1 (i) but missed in HCS  format      
k. Name(s) of children due for DPT booster-1 (j) but missed in  HCS  format      
6 
Children 2 -5 
                                       sraey
(24-59 
months) a. No. of children f ound in t his HH  by mon itor as on day of HCS       
b. No. of children f ound du e for MR-1/MR 2 as on day of HCS   MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  
c. Name(s) of childre n due (b) fo r MR1/MR2  MR1: MR1: MR1: MR1: MR1: 
MR2: MR2: MR2: MR2: MR2: 
d. No. of children due (c) for MR1/MR2 but missed in  HCS MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: 
 
7 Refusal Has this chi ld missed  any due dose due to refusal  / AEFI app rehe nsion? Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No 
 
Interacti on with the surveyor/team: Met surveyor/team?  Yes / No (If no – skip Q 8-  a, b, c and d) 
8 a. Who  has done HCS ?         ASHA / AWW / ANM / Link worker / Others  
b. Did the surveyor receive train ing prior to HCS?  Yes / No      
c. No. of houses planned b y the team per day:  i) less than  25 ii) 25-50 iii) 50 - 100 iv) ≥ 100 
d. Has the s urveyor (team )` used stand ardized HCS format?   Yes / No 
 
Assess ment b y the mon itor:  
9 a. Has surv eyor missed  children due for one or more vaccin es in ≥2 HH?  Y / N / NA (if no t met with sur veyor/team)  
b. No. of cluster of ≥3 consecutiv e HH n ot visited by surveyor/team (within 5 HH monitored and  in th e area  whil e walk through) ? ______ _  
 
□ Recommend repeat survey if: 1). ≥ 3 consecutiv e HH n ot visited for surv ey AND/OR 2). ≥ 2 HH have missed children d ue for any du e vaccine dose(s ) in survey           ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

612024:Step-4Review of all survey forms and consolidation of sub 
centre/ ANM area microplans
Each ASHA/AWW/LW/surveyor should submit the complete list of beneficiaries in the relevant 
forms (Forms SC-3, 4A, 4B and 4C) to the respective ANM after completing the head count 
survey.
ANM should plan for a meeting of all the surveyors to review the forms. The meeting venue, 
date and time should be communicated to all surveyors at least 2–3 days in advance so that 
they attend the meeting with completed survey forms.
Facilitator:  Sector MO/LHV/health supervisor/ CHO
Participants:  ASHA/AWW/surveyor with ASHA facilitator, LHV/LS 
Key activities to be conducted during this step:
•	RI microplans are reviewed and updated as per actual head counts of target beneficiaries 
and identification of any missed (migratory/ settled) pockets including HRAs in sub 
centre/ ANM area
•	Clearly demarcated maps with HRAs included 
•	RI sessions planned as per the injection load and community needs. All areas including 
HRAs should be tagged to sessions
•	Vaccine and logistic estimation and distribution plan should be finalized
•	Communication plan should be finalized 
During the meeting
•	ANM should review the information collected during the house-to-house survey in Forms 
SC-3, 4A, 4B, 4C with the ASHA/AWW/link workers/surveyor
•	A simple map of the SC/ ANM area can then be made from the information and experiences 
of the workers who have completed the survey. This map need not be to scale but should 
include area demarcation for ASHA/AWW/mobilizers and other information as mentioned 
above
As the actual head counts and areas are now available, review and update the RI session 
plans to address the following issues: 
•	Are the number of sessions presently sufficient?
•	Are all the areas covered?
•	Are the migrants/HRAs identified? If so, are 
RI sessions being conducted for these mobile 
populations?
Session due list (Form SC-5) –With the information gathered in Form 4A, 4B and 4C, it is 
now possible to correctly quantify the number of beneficiaries.
Outputs expected
•	Completed head count survey form (Form SC-3) for each area
•	Completed Beneficiary list of pregnant women and children 0-2 years Forms SC-4A and 
4B beneficiary list respectively and Form 4C –missed children 2-5 years as per ASHA/areas 
identified
•	Clearly demarcated maps with HRAs identified 
After the review of all survey forms, ANM should 
•	plan for RI sessions as per the injection load and community needs In urban / periurban / slum areas, the 
health workers should be vigilant for 
migrated population and enlist the 
beneficiaries and if new settlements 
are found include in the microplan
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

62•	Vaccine and logistic estimation
•	Vaccine distribution plan 
•	Communication plan  
Roles and responsibilities
Personnel Activities to be performed  Supervisor
ANM o Conduct the meeting at SC/ ANM area
o Finalize area listing and draft of plan for con- ducting RI 
sessions in the areasMOIC, Sector 
MO
ASHA o Contribute to final forms SC ANM/ASHA 
facilitator
AWW o Contribute to final forms SC ANM/LS
An overview of RI Forms 5 to 10 used in the SC/ ANM area RI microplan is given in Fig. 5.17.
Fig. 5.17. Overview of Sub Centre RI Microplan – Forms SC-5 to 10
RI Form SC-5
RI Form SC-6
RI Form SC-7
RI Form SC-8
RI Form SC-9
RI Form SC-10Per session due list Update a/f_ter each RI session
Number of beneficiaries
from actual head countCalculation of
injection loadDeciding number
of RI sessions
RI session planDeciding location
of RI sessions
Per session estimation of vaccines and logistics
ANM workplan
Communication planVaccine distribution plan
RI session beneficiary due list (Form SC-5)
Purpose:
•	This form is prepared by ANM to enlist the beneficiaries due for vaccination and utilized by 
ASHA/ mobilizers for mobilization of due beneficiaries to RI session/s
•	This is also a record of payment of ASHA incentives for mobilization of beneficiaries – full 
and complete immunization
•	The visitors and guest children, pregnant women who have come to mother’s place and 
are due for vaccine/s should be identified, included in the duelist and vaccinated. Health 
workers should be very vigilant in urban / periurban areas for tenants and in slum areas for 
the migrant beneficiaries to be included in the due list for vaccination
Responsibility: This format is to be prepared by the ANM with the support of ASHAs/AWWs/
LWs after the proposed microplan is approved by the medical officer.ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

63Fig. no. 5.18: RI session beneficiary due list: Form SC-5 (refer annexure 2.7)
 
Fig.5.19: Utilization of session due list for RI sessions:
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

64Utilization of session due list for RI sessions:
This format is to be used in triplicate  (in different colours), one copy each for 
•	ASHA/ AWWs/ Link workers/ other mobilizer – for mobilization of beneficiaries to session 
site
•	ANM – to plan the session  
•	Pharmacist/ Cold-chain handler of PHC/UPHC  – to plan for vaccine and logistics distribution. 
ANMs should use carbon sheets while filling the form. It is recommended that a booklet 
containing enough sheets for one year be printed to enable continuous use of the information 
and developing of a realistic RI session due list.
SOP for filling Form SC-5: RI session due list
Column A: The serial number for each beneficiary is to be entered here.
Column B: MCP registration number is to be entered where available. ANM can provide this 
information from her RCH register. This unique number will help track the beneficiaries for 
complete immunization. Enter U-WIN registration number if available.
Column C: Name of the child/pregnant woman identified for services during this session is 
entered here.
Column D: For children enter the date of birth and for PW the expected date of delivery, if 
known.
Column E: Enter the age of the child in completed months or age of pregnant woman in 
completed years and months.
Column F: Enter the gender of the child.
Column G: Enter the name of the father or husband for easy identification at the village level 
along with contact number.
Column H: Enlist all the vaccines that the beneficiary is due for in the upcoming session.
The following columns are to be filled at the end of the RI session:
Column I: After the completion of the RI session, cross check that all beneficiaries had arrived, 
answer as Yes or No
Column J:  If column I is “Yes”, vaccines administered on the day of vaccination to pregnant 
woman / child should be mentioned in column J.
Column K:  If column I is “No” i.e if the beneficiary has not received vaccine on the day of 
vaccination, specify the reason (R1=Beneficiary out of Village/ House locked; R2= Beneficiary 
sick; R3= Refusal; R4= Vaccinated outside; R5=AEFI apprehension; R6=Other reason) for not 
vaccination in column K.
Column L & M:  If the beneficiary receives the vaccine/s, the next due date and next due 
vaccines are entered in column L & M respectively.
Column N, O & P:  These are to be filled as and when ASHA receives her payments.  ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

65RI session planning (Form SC-6)
The area wise, actual number of pregnant women and children (infants, 1-2 years and children 
2-5 years missed the RI dose) are obtained from Head count survey form (Form 3). From this, 
the annual and monthly target beneficiaries of pregnant women and infants (0-1 years) are 
utilized for planning RI sessions, estimation of vaccine and logistics as subsequent steps.  The 
calculations are as below
Calculation of target beneficiaries: annual and monthly target 
Annual target:
Annual target of PW = Actual number of PW as per head count survey X 2
Annual target of infants = actual number of infants (0-1 yrs) as per head count survey
Monthly Target:
Monthly target of PW = Annual target pregnant women divided by 12
Monthly target of children = Annual infant target divided by 12
Calculating injection load (for determining the frequency of RI sessions)
This calculation is to be used only as a planning tool for session frequency and  not for 
estimation of vaccines or logistics.
Firstly, the total number of injections needed per beneficiary are determined. This gives a 
multiplying factor of 14 for an infant and 2 for a pregnant woman.
For a child:
•	BCG – 1 injection
•	Pentavalent – 3 injections
•	fIPV – 3 injections
•	MR Vaccine – 2 injections
•	PCV – 3 injections 
•	DPT – 2 booster injections
For a pregnant woman:
•	Td– 2 injections (for pregnant women)
For districts where JE vaccine is included in the RI schedule add 2 to the above number, 
giving the multiplying factor of 16 for an infant and 2 for a pregnant woman.
Injection load:
In non-JE district:  Injection load  = (Monthly PW x 2) + (Monthly infant x 14) 
In JE district:  Injection load  = (Monthly PW x 2) + (Monthly infant x 16)
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

66Note:
Annual Target of Infants = Actual number of Infants as per head count
Annual target of PW = Actual number of PW as per head count x 2
Monthly target = Annual target/ 12 (Keep it as fraction)
Monthly Injection Load calculation:
• For JE districts = {{Monthly Infant target x 16) + (Monthly PW target x 2)}
• For Non-JE districts = {(Monthly infant target x 14) + (Monthly PW target x 2)}
Note: Round off all numbers in injection load to next higher I,umber
PW found in Head count survey are representative of almost half year pregnancy, as it usually 
becomes visible during second trimester onwards, hence for annual target calculation, it must 
be multiplied by 2.
Planning frequency of RI sessions based on injection load: 
Based on the monthly injection load, the number of RI sessions to be conducted for each 
village/area is to be entered as per the guideline below.
Frequency of outreach RI sessions depending on injection load:
• 1 to 25 injections – 1 session every alternate month
• 26 to 50 injections – 1 session every month
• 51 to 100 injections – 2 sessions every month
For very hard-to-reach areas with small population, plan for at least one session every 
quarter for a minimum of 4 sessions a year
 
In bigger institutes like medical colleges, ESI hospitals, CGHS hospitals, Railway, Army hospitals, 
District hospitals or equivalent hospitals, etc. can have daily RI sessions based on footfall.
Fig. no. 5.20: Sub-center/ ANM area – RI sessions plan: SC-6 (Refer annexure 2.8)
PW Infants PW Infants
F G
(D/12)(E/12)Type of 
Session - 
Fixed / 
outreach/ 
mobile Annual Target 
(PW = Actual 
Head count X2 
, Infants 
=Actual Head 
count)Monthly Target 
A B C D E H I J K L MS.NoName of Villages / Wards / 
Mohallas / Hamlets / Tolas 
/ HRAs#  
(From form SC-1)     
New areas /identiﬁed 
missed areas shoul d be 
entered marking with 
asterisk(*) Total 
Population         
of Area 
(Total of 
form 3 
Column E)Beneﬁciary Targets
Monthly 
Injection 
Load ₤Number of 
Sessions $Name and location of the 
Session site / sitesName of the mobilizer 
with designation and 
mob.no.Type of 
area / 
terrain - 
plain / 
hilly / 
riverine/ 
tribal area
SOP for filling Form SC-6: RI session plan
Enter the serial number and name of the villages in Columns A and B , keeping the same 
order as in Form SC-1. New areas /identified missed areas should be entered towards the 
end with clear marking that this is a new area, using an asterisk (*).
Using Form SC-3 Column E (Total), the individual areas actual population (from the survey) 
should be entered into Column C.
Calculating annual and monthly target population:
Beneficiaries in the UIP are the PW and the children of an area who are eligible for any 
vaccinations. The cardinal numbers of these beneficiaries is obtained by conducting the ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

67area and house to house survey. Once the survey is completed, these figures will be available 
from Form SC-3.
The information for Column D is of the annual target of PW in each area.
Annual target of PW = Number of PW identified in the area survey X 2. 
 The information for Column E is of annual target of infants = actual number of infants 
identified during the area assessment.
For columns F and G
Monthly target of PW = Annual target divided by 12
Monthly target of children = Annual target divided by 12
Column H:  Enter the monthly injection load for each area. For calculation of injection load (only 
for determining the number of sessions) refer above.
Column I:  Based on the monthly injection load the number of RI sessions to be conducted for 
each village/area is to be entered as per the guideline above.
Column J describes the location of the vaccination site. It is important that the exact location 
be entered, preferably with a landmark. This helps to collate the information and makes it 
easier to develop the overall plan for RI sessions under the SC/ ANM area.
Mobilizers play an important role in mobilizing beneficiaries to the RI session site. The name 
of the mobilizer with designation and contact number are to be entered into Column K.
Column L. Describes the type of terrain as this is a factor that contributes to determining 
the number of sessions in the area and the method of vaccine delivery. The areas may be as 
follows:
•	Plain – flat and accessible with no compromise in accessibility
•	Hilly – hilly area
•	Riverine – area divided by a river or rivulets making access difficult
•	Inaccessible – hard to reach due to absence of roads or is approachable only by foot.
Column M. Describes the type of session. Sessions can be:
•	Fixed. These sessions are held where vaccine storage is possible because of availability 
of ILR and deep freezer (DF), i.e. the sessions conducted at PHC/ UPHC/ CHC
•	Outreach. All sessions conducted where vaccine has to be taken by vaccine carrier
•	Mobile. Sessions conducted using a vehicle which moves from site to site along with the 
immunization team and vaccine
•	Tagged. Site/area which does not have a session but is linked to the nearest session site.
Planning RI session site and timing:
Majority of the sessions are planned in the subcentre or Health and wellness centre. However, 
it is crucial to identify other sites in an area to meet the following criteria:
•	monthly injection load of the area, 
•	community needs and demands (Demand driven)
•	easy access to the target beneficiaries
•	acceptance to the community and as per their time and day
•	visibility of the site to the people
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

68Planning RI session based on community needs:
It is important to note that, the community needs, and demands are to be considered for 
planning sessions. The steps to provide demand driven vaccination sessions are mentioned 
below.
Vaccination on demand strategy: 
The demand driven vaccination sessions can be planned in any area as per need of the 
population.
Step-1: Identification of influencers:  
Identify the influencers in the catchment area and arrange a meeting. Influencers will help 
in identification of day, time and venue for vaccination. Influencers can be gram pradhan, 
community or religious leaders, teachers, NGO members, Resident Welfare Association (RWA) 
or ward members, counsellors, village elders in tribal areas, etc.
Step-2: Identify venue and time:  
Identify suitable venue, day and time for conducting sessions. Efforts should be made to scale 
up the community ownership for mobilization. If the sessions are already being conducted 
and are not suitable/acceptable to the community, make required modifications.
It is important to ensure that services meet the needs of the population and should be offered 
at the appropriate locations and times. Vaccination should be promoted with the help of 
locally available communication means so as to reach all the families. UHND/VHSND forums 
may be used to approach the influencers.
Step 3: Head count survey and Due list generation:  
The Due list is to be generated based on head count survey. The due list is to be shared with 
the leaders of community (elderly, religious leaders, gram Pradhan, etc.) to ensure all due 
children are identified.
Step-4:  Update micro plans to conduct sessions as per community needs:  
Once immunization-session schedules are decided and agreed to with the communities, it is 
imperative that they be adhered to. Micro plans should be modified to reflect new/ revised 
session sites and plans. Changing and cancelling scheduled sessions can result in loss of 
confidence in the service. A critical part of planning, therefore, is to ensure that sufficient 
vaccines, injection supplies, and cold-chain equipment and all logistical needs are in place 
well in advance of the session date.
Step-5:  Engage community leaders for mobilization:  
Take the support of community leaders and members in organizing sessions, mobilization 
and any other support.
Well planned RI sessions, ensure reach of all the target beneficiaries, thereby leading to 
successful implementation of the Universal immunization programme in the subcentre 
or ANM area.ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

69Types of Routine Immunization sessions:
The different types of RI sessions is mentioned in fig.no.5.21
Fig.no.5.21: Types of Routine Immunization sessions:
A well-planned RI session, ensure reach of all the target beneficiaries, thereby leading 
to successful implementation of the Universal immunization program in the subcentre 
or ANM area.
Ensuring “Same day, Same site, Same time” policy will help to   increase community 
acceptance and in turn the utilization of services provided.
Per session injection load and vaccine distribution plan (RI Microplan Form SC-7)
Once the frequency, type and location of RI sessions to cover all the areas are finalized, the 
beneficiaries per session for each vaccine and Vitamin A should be calculated and accordingly 
the vaccine distribution plan for each session is developed. Vaccine distribution plan should 
mention the mode of transport and name of the responsible person with contact number. It 
is very important to tag each session site with the designated AEFI management center.
Note:  For fixed site use daily average of PW and children vaccinated (number vaccinated per 
month/30)
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

70Fig.no.5.22: Subcenter/ ANM area – Session wise injection load and vaccine distribution plan: Form SC-7 (Refer Annexure 2.9)
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

71SOPs for using Form SC-7
In Column A, this is the name of the RI session site.
Enter each RI session site in a separate row. It is important that the exact site location be 
entered. This will give the exact planning of sessions for the SC/ ANM area on a single 
page . If the site is located in an Anganwadi centre, also include the centre number and 
location. If the site is located in private premises, the house owner’s name should also be 
entered. Include a landmark where possible.
Column B. This contains the names of areas to which a RI session site provides services. 
Enter the names of the village/s or areas as per Form SC-1. For multiple areas, write the 
names separated by commas into this column.
e.g – Village XYZ
Column C  The frequency of sessions at this RI site is to be entered in Column D. It may be 
entered as:
o once in a quarter, i.e. once in three months
o once in two months
o twice a month
o daily.
Column D and E. The target of PW and infants per session is determined for each site. This is 
obtained from monthly targets in Form SC-6 Columns F and G. If the site caters to more than 
one area, add the targets. If there are two RI sites in a large village, then the monthly target 
is to be divided by 2.
Example – monthly target for each area from Form SC-6 columns F and G
Village XYZ has 3 PW and 5 infants similarly tola ABC has 1 PW and 2 infants for RI site no 1.  
Thus, for RI site 1, monthly target will be 4 PW and 7 infants. Village XYZ has 8 PW and 12 
infants with two RI sites 2 and 3. Thus, for RI site 2, monthly target will be 4 PW and 6 infants 
and for RI site 3 also is 4 PW and 6 infants
Note: For fixed site use daily average of PW and children vaccinated (number vaccinated per 
month/30)
Columns F to R. Injection load for each antigen is to be entered in Columns F to Q. Using the 
target from Columns D and E the individual antigen dose requirement can be calculated 
using the formula in the boxes.
Column S. The total injection load for each site is now available to enter into Column S. This 
is calculated by adding the number of beneficiaries in Columns F, H, J, K, L, M, N, O, P   (any 
new injectable vaccines introduced) . (Note that OPV, Rotavirus vaccine (where applicable) 
and Vit A should not be considered as injections.)
Columns T to V. These columns show the exact time of RI site functioning for the next 3 
months. Each column is for a month. The day is to be entered as follows:
– Days – Mon, Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri, Sat
– Weeks – 1 to 5
Each column is for a month. The day is to be entered as follows:
E.g. If the session is held in month 1 on the fourth Wednesday, the entry will be “Wed 4” in 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

72Column T.
Each state can customize this format for their own RI days and immunization schedule.
Method of vaccine distribution with details of responsible person to each site is to be entered 
in the three Columns W.
o Information on the mode of transport – two-wheeler/three-wheeler/four-wheeler with   
its registration number, if possible, needs to be mentioned.
o Name of the person transporting the vaccine and his contact number are to be entered.
Column X:  Every RI session should be tagged with the nearest designated AEFI center (eg. 
CHC, District hospital, Private hospital, etc.) which should be mentioned in column X with 
contact number which should be contacted by ANM in the event of any adverse events.
Alternate Vaccine Delivery System
Alternate Vaccine Delivery (AVD) System is an incentive-based vaccine and logistics delivery 
system from the last CCP to session sites using locally hired people. Vaccine Delivery System 
refers to the independent person who delivers the vaccine carrier from the PHC to the session 
site. It allows for better community engagement with the immunization programme and 
promote vaccine uptake.
Medical officer should review and finalize a route plan for the AVD at every CCP. The AVD 
plan and route chart for alternate vaccine (and logistics) delivery (AVD) is prepared to the 
session sites from the nearest cold-chain storage point for each session day. The plan should 
be prepared keeping in mind – time-to-care approach of 1 hour. It implies that the AVD plan 
should be prepared in a way that the distance between the CCP and the farthest session site 
can be covered within one hour through any means of transportation.
AVD transports the vaccine carriers through bicycle, bike, boat, on foot or any other means of 
transportation. AVD delivers the vaccine directly to the ANM at the session site, and it allows 
for the session to begin on time. Similarly, at the end of the same day, AVD collects the vaccine 
carrier from the ANM and returns the vaccine carrier along with biomedical waste generated 
at the session site to the CCP after the session is over.
Per Session estimation of Vaccine and logistics (Form SC-8):
It is very important to calculate the vaccine and logistic requirement for each session site 
considering the vaccine wastage. The wastage multiplication factor (WMF) for each vaccine 
and logistics is utilized for calculating the exact requirement. The details about WMF is 
mentioned below.
Wastage multiplication factor (WMF)–
It is calculated using the following equation:
100 divided by [100 – (Permissible wastage %)]
E.g. if wastage is 10%, 100/ [100-10] 100/90 = 1.11ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

73Table No.5.5: Permissible wastage percentage
Vaccine Maximum permissible  wastage % WMF
Hep B 10 1.11
BCG 50 2.0
OPV 10 1.11
Rotavirus 10 1.11
fIPV 10 1.11
PCV 10 1.11
Pentavalent 10 1.11
MR 25 1.33
JE 10 1.11
DPT 10 1.11
Td 10 1.11
Syringes 10 1.11
Fig.no.5.23: Per Session estimation of Vaccine and logistics (Form SC-8) refer annexure 2.10
 
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

74SOPs for using Form SC-8
This format collates the exact requirement of vaccines and logistics (considering wastage) 
for each session site. This information is calculated using data from Form SC-7.
Columns ‘a’ should  be in the same as column A of Form SC-7.
Columns ‘b’ through ‘l’, These columns, provide the number of vials/units of vaccine required 
for each session site. For the calculations, use the information from columns mentioned from 
Form 8 for each session site. (Number of doses x Wastage Multiplication Factor- WMF) ÷ no. 
of doses per vial.
Column n – Calculation of number of Vitamin A bottles for sessions.  
Columns ‘o’, ‘p’ and ‘q’ - Calculates the requirement of syringes including reconstitution 
syringes. Calculation is based on number of vials from Columns ‘b’ to d and g to l of this 
format. Remember – only calculate reconstitution syringes for BCG, MR and JE (live 
attenuated vaccine).
In the format wastage factors and dose per vial are given in the row below the names of 
antigens. Columns r to w are to indicate the requirement of other logistics for each 
session site.
ANM Work plan (Form SC-9):
Based on the planning of RI sessions, ANM should prepare a quarterly workplan mentioning 
the RI session days with details of session location and timing. The RI days vary from state 
to state and even from area to area. Eg. Some state has fixed RI sessions on Thursdays and 
outreach RI sessions on Tuesdays.
Once the RI microplanning of SC/ ANM area is completed, the date of submission of final 
workplan by ANM and also date of verification by MO I/C should be mentioned at the bottom 
of the format SC-9.  ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

75Fig. no. 5.24: ANM work plan: Form SC-9 (refer Annexure 2.11)
  
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

76Communication plan for SC/ ANM area (Form SC-10):
ANM should identify the IEC activities that can be conducted in her areas by preparing 
communication plan (RI Form SC-10). It is important to firstly identify the contact person who 
will coordinate the activity such as a school principal or community leader. Meetings such 
as VHSC/ UHNC, Mothers meetings, AWW meetings, MAS meetings are planned regularly, 
and the tentative dates are fixed based on the availability of MO. 
IEC material (Posters / banners): These should be displayed at prominent places in the 
community.
Pamphlets / leaflets / counseling aids are material that can be placed at the AWC or other 
locations and used during RI sessions / other meetings.
PRI / Community influencers can play a key role in RI and it is essential to identify them in a 
village or ward area in organizing IEC activities.ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

77Fig.no.5.25: Communication plan for SC/ ANM area: Form SC-10 (refer annexure 2.12) 
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

78Step-5Review and finalization of Sub Centre/ ANM area plans 
and finalization of session due lists area microplans
The final step in the RI microplanning exercise at the PHC consists of review and finalization 
of the newly updated/ proposed SC RI microplans and finalization of formats and session due 
lists.
Review of the updated / proposed RI plans
The outputs are now focused on the finalization of SC microplans and the development of 
the PHC microplan. Each ANM presents her sub centre microplans focusing on the following 
points: 
1. Total number of areas identified – any increase or decrease? Form SC-1
2. Total number of HRAs identified – any increase or decrease? Form SC-1
3. Demarcation of areas – who will be looking after which area? Form SC-1 and SC-2
4. Number of RI sessions planned? Form SC-6 and SC-7
5. Are the maps updated? RI Form SC-2
6. Is sub centre RI microplan now complete?
Finalization of SC/ ANM area microplan:  Each ANM should compile all the forms of SC/ ANM 
area and submit to PHC/UPHC. Plans from all sub centre/ ANM areas including the vacant 
(permanent/ temporary) should be prepared and submitted to PHC/UPHC. The MO of PHC/ 
UPHC reviews the microplans as per the checklist for SC/ ANM area (Refer. Table 5.6) and 
approves. Once approval is done, ANM should develop the RI session due lists (Form SC-5) as 
per the RI sessions.
Responsibility: Medical officer
Expected participants for the meeting: ANMs, LHV, Health supervisors
Activities at the final PHC/ UPHC meeting
•	Review and finalization of SC/ ANM area plans for 
o inclusion of all HRAs
o special plans for difficult areas
o adequate deployment of mobilizers
o adequate session planning
•	Compile plans from all SCs/ ANM areas to develop PHC/ UPHC plan
•	Prepare vaccine delivery and supervision plan
Recalculate vaccine and logistics requirement. 
Outputs expected
Availability of the following documents after Step 5:
•	Forms SC-5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and10 for each SC/ ANM areaROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

79Roles and responsibilities
Personnel Activities to be performed Supervisor
MOICCoordination of the activity/reviewing each SC/ 
ANM area planDIO
ANMGenerate SC/ ANM area forms and suggest 
changes to the reviewing officerMO
Data handler
(Supervisor, Data 
entry operator, etc.)Compilation of SC/ ANM area microplans. 
Preparation of PHC/ UPHC microplanMO
Fig. 5.26. Flow diagram of RI microplanning process at subcenter/ ANM area level: 
Master list of all areas and head count survey planning (SC-1)
Area mapping (SC-2)
Head count of pregnant 
women (SC-4A)Head count of infants and 
children (SC-4B)Children b/w 2-5 years with 
missed due doses (SC-4C)
Prepare due beneficiary list 
(SC-5)
Annual target of beneficiaries
Pregnant women = Actual head count of PW X 2
Infant = Actual head count of infants (0-1 years)
Monthly target of beneficiaries
Pregnant women = (Actual head count of PW X 2)/12
Infant= rActual head count of infants (0-1 vearsll/12
calculation of monthly Injection Load for estimation
of number of sessions
Estimation of beneficiaries per
session and vaccine distribution
plan (SC-7)Estimation of vaccines & logistics
per session (SC-8)Conduct house to house survey
House to House survey form (SC-3)
SC-6
ANM workplan
(SC-9)
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

80Table 5.6 Checklist for RI microplan components – at SC/ ANM area
Sl. 
No.Components of Routine Immunization Microplan Available
Yes No
1 Master list which includes all villages/areas/HRAs (SC-1)
2 Map of area -with name of village, urban area including all hamlets 
(tola), sub-villages, sub-wards, sector, mohallas, hard to reach areas, 
etc.) (SC-2)
3 Total number of households and target beneficiaries - pregnant women, 
children below 2 years and children between 2-5 years missed for due 
vaccine doses (SC-3)
4 Beneficiary list – pregnant women, children below 2 years and children 
between 2-5 years missed for due vaccine doses (SC-4A, 4B, & 4C)
5 Session due list (SC-5)
6 Estimation of beneficiaries and injection load per area including HRAs
7 RI session plan (SC-6)
8 Session wise injection load and vaccine distribution plan (SC-7)
9 Estimation of vaccines and logistics (SC-8)
10 ANM work/ roster plan (SC-9) 
11 Vaccine coverage chart of all antigens and doses
RI microplan for the PHC/ UPHC is prepared based on the subcenter/ ANM area microplan. For 
details of preparation of PHC/ UPHC microplan, refer Routine Immunization manual for medical 
officers. 
5.7 Coverage of DPT-booster 2 and Td 10 & Td 16 in schools and community 
level:4
Vaccination  for DPT-booster 2 and Td 10 & 16 should be done primarily through school-based 
activity. The out of school children should be identified, listed and mobilized to the RI session 
at community level for vaccination. These plans should be available for in-school and out-of-
school children and should be reviewed quarterly.
Specific components of a RI microplan for DPT-booster 2 and Td immunization: 
	Two types of microplans should be prepared: 
o For School going –School immunization plan 
o For out of school - Community based immunization plan
	For School going –School immunization plan 
Village/ward/tola wise enlistment of all schools (government, government-aided, private, 
religious/ faith-based schools, etc.) of the area 
o Line listing of all students of class 1st (5-6 yrs), 5th (10 yrs) and 10th (16 yrs) of the 
schools 
o Vaccine and logistic estimates should be based on the listing of target beneficiaries 
o Session planning should be based on the coordination between health and education 
departmentROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

81	For out of school - Community based immunization plan
o The health worker with support of AWW & ASHA should identify and enlist missed 
beneficiaries of DPT booster 2, Td 10 & Td 16. These beneficiaries should be mobilized 
to the nearest RI session for vaccination
	Coordination may be done with RBSK team and ICDS adolescent schemes. There are 
three different strategies to strengthen school immunization. (Refer chapter) 
	AEFI management plan: should be available
	Communication strategy: A very good communication strategy is needed for effective 
implementation of school vaccination. The lessons learnt from MR campaigns should be 
applied
	Supervision and monitoring plan:  Ensure good supervision and monitoring of the 
activities
Fig. no. 5.27: School immunization plan for DPT-Booster 2 and Td - Sub-center/ ANM 
area: SC-11A (refer annexure 2.13)
 
Fig. no. 5.28: Community based immunization plan for DPT-Booster 2 and Td - Sub-
center/ ANM area: SC-11A (refer annexure 2.14)
 
For further details refer to Strengthening Td 10 and Td 16 Vaccine Implementation guidelines
5.8 Planning in High-Risk areas: 
High Risk Areas (HRAs):
HRAs need special attention as they often miss routine and supplementary immunization 
and pose a risk for polio, measles rubella and other VPDs. HRAs are categorized as migratory 
and non-migratory (settled).
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

82Migratory HRAs Non-Migratory HRAs
•	Slums with migration
•	Nomads
•	Brick kilns
•	Construction sites
•	Other migratory areas eg. Char areas 
in river delta), riverine areas with 
shifting populations, migrants in tea/
coffee estates, etc.•	Slums (settled population)
•	Hard to reach areas
•	Unserved areas with shortage of health 
workers (sub centers vacant for more than 
three months)
•	Areas with outbreaks of vaccine preventable 
diseases (past 3 years)
•	Areas with vaccine hesitancy/refusal
•	Others: Any area with a risk of disease 
transmission or outbreak. Security 
compromised areas, orphanage prisons, 
brothels, red-light areas
Microplanning in HRAs:
Identification and validation of HRAs: During the head count survey,
•	these areas should be identified and enlisted in the below mentioned format (Form HRA-1)
•	updated every quarterly and accordingly RI sessions are planned
•	enlisted HRAs should be validated by the supervisors (use Form HRA-2)
Format for HRA enlistment: ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

83Fig. No. 5.29: Format to capture HRA data at Sub center/ ANM area:
 
Fig. no.5.30: Format for field validation of sites with migratory population:
(0-1 
years)(1-2 
years)(2-5
years)Y / NIf Yes then  
details (day, 
week)
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O
1Y / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N
2Y / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N
1 2 3 4 5
Signature of validator:__________________________________ Total Reestimated 0-5 yr childrenSl. 
No
.Name of the site & 
LocationType of 
HRA 
(1-5)Date Field 
Validation 
DoneWhether 
the site 
existsRe-
estimated 
PopulationRe-
Estimated 
Households
Reestimated 0-1 yr children
Reestimated 1-2 yr children
Reestimated 2-5 yr childrenNo. of sites / Areas
Reestimated Population
Reestimated householdsMigratory HRA Total Migratory HRA: 1-Slum with migration;, 2-Nommads;, 3-Brick Kilns; 4-Constructions; 5-other 
migratory HRA;PField Validation of Sites with Migratory populations
Name of District/ Corporation:____________________Block/Urban area: _____________________________ PHC/ UPHC:_______________________________ Sub Centre:__________________________
Name of the person conducting Field Validation:_____________________________________ Designation:_______________________________________________
Re-Estimated 
Beneficiaries Whether RI services 
planned using mobile 
team / special team?Whether 
reesimate 
approximately 
match survey 
dataWhere are they Migrated 
from?
(area, block, district, State)Name of the 
ANM/CHO 
responsible 
for areaName of the 
Mobilizer 
responsible for 
areaForm: HRA-2
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

84Session planning in High risk: 
•	In vaccine hesitant areas,  community accepted sites can boost immunization coverage. 
Sessions sites in the community run hospitals/schools/community owned halls, public/
private hospitals, schools and colleges, premises of local influencers, panchayat hall, etc., 
are more acceptable and convenient for all the beneficiaries
•	In high-risk areas like brick kilns, nomadic sites, hamlets, etc., select a clean, convenient, 
comfortable place in a shaded place making sure the vaccines are not exposed to direct 
sunlight or explore use of mobile session for such areas with proper planning and 
mobilization, the vaccine wastage is to be kept to the minimum during mobile sessions. 
Wherever required, plan for mobile sessions for optimal use of resources. Support of CSOs 
to create kiosks to attract residents for vaccination may be elicited
Planning in Urban areas:
Characteristics of urban areas – why they need special attention 
Urban areas face a number of challenges and issues as follows: 
• Poor demarcation of areas
• Large volume of transit / migrant population 
• Expanding borders and peri-urban areas 
• HRA with a higher number of construction and nomadic sites 
• Manpower shortage 
• Unrecognized slums
Provision of services to tackle challenges in urban areas: 
a) Area demarcation:  Prepare maps with clear demarcation of areas for AWW/ASHA/link 
worker. Superimpose ANM area on the map. Plan for field verification where boundaries 
are not well defined. 
b) Accessibility:  Identify local solutions based on the needs e.g. 
•	Use three or two wheelers to access narrow lanes
•	Seek support from local key influencers and community leaders
•	Get support from local civil service organizations – Rotary, Lions, professional bodies, 
etc. 
c) Infrastructure for providing RI services: 
•	“Same day, Same site, Same time” provision of services: This should include all 
anganwadi centres, dispensaries, clinics and maternity homes in the public sector; 
all NGOs, private institutions /practitioners engaged in providing health care in urban 
areas
•	Urban outreach: Expand the network of urban service provision points e.g. in every 
urban slum. seek help from local bodies / shops / organizations
•	Communication: Use various channels to inform the community about the timing of 
local immunization services; local service delivery points; the vaccines and schedule 
of immunization and the benefits of immunization
d) Multiple departments / NGOs / organizations / coordination:  Support the medical 
officer to identify and coordinate with the multiple agencies already working in the area. 
Joint planning will help to reduce duplication and improve the coverage of immunization 
services.ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MICROPLANNING

85Cold-chain and vaccine managementUnit 6

86Key contents Page
6.1. Cold-chain 87
6.2. Cold-chain equipments 87
6.3. Checking vaccines for correct maintenance of cold-chain 98
6.4. Guidelines for use of open vaccine vials in immunization programme 100Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, Health worker should be able: 
• To define and describe the importance of the cold-chain 
• To describe which vaccines are sensitive to heat /light and freezing 
• To demonstrate how to check vaccines for exposure to heat or 
freezing 
• To demonstrate how to condition frozen ice packs and how to pack a 
vaccine carrier properly

876.1. Cold-chain
Cold-chain is a system of storing and transporting vaccines at recommended temperatures 
from the point of manufacture to the point of use.
Fig. 6.1. Immunization cold-chain supply system
Insulated Van  
 Vaccin e 
Manuf actur
Air 
Trans port  
Prima ry Store 
(GM SD /State)  
Refrigerated 
/ Insulated 
Van   
State Store  
Bene/f_iciary 
 Session Sites 
 Vaccin e 
Carrier  
Prima ry Health 
Centre 
All Vaccin es in 
ILR Insulated Van  District Vaccine 
Store  
(+ 2° to 8°C)
The key elements of the cold-chain  are: 
	Personnel:  to manage vaccine storage and distribution (vaccine and cold-chain handler 
at each cold-chain point)
	Equipment:  to store and transport vaccine and monitor temperature
	Procedures:  to ensure correct utilization of equipment and ensure vaccines are stored 
and transported safely
6.2 Cold-chain equipments
Ice Lined Refrigerator (ILR): 
Maintains a cabinet temperature between +2°C to +8°C; is used to store UIP vaccines at the 
PHC and district level. Two types of ILR are present. One with top opening lid which prevents 
loss of cold air during door opening and second with front opening lid. Both Type of ILR can 
keep vaccines safe with as little as 8 hours continuous electricity supply in a 24-hour period.
All UIP vaccines must be stored in baskets in ILR. In case basket is not available with top 
opening ILR, two layers of empty ice packs can be laid flat on the bottom of the ILR to avoid 
contact with the inside floor of the cabinet. Vaccines should never be kept on the floor of the 
ILR.
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENTCold-chain and vaccine 
management

88Fig. 6.2 Storing vaccines in the ILR
Fig. 6.3. Front opening Ice Lined Refrigerator
 
NEVER keep any vials 
that are expired, frozen 
or with VVMs beyond the 
end point  in the ILR as 
they may be confused 
with those containing 
potent vaccines.
Keep them in the red 
bag for disinfection and 
disposal.
IDENTIFY A DRY SPACE 
FOR STORING EXPIRED/
UNUSABLE VACCINES 
BEFORE FINAL DISPOSALCOLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT


89Table 6.1. Dos and don’ts for ILR use
Dos Don’ts
•	Keep all vaccines including those returned under 
open vial policy in a box marked as Open Vials in the 
basket supplied along with the ILR
•	Store diluents at +2°C to +8°C at least 24 hours before 
supplying for use in vaccination
•	Leave space in between the vaccine boxes
•	Place a thermometer in between the baskets.
•	Keep freeze-sensitive vaccines at the top of the 
basket
•	Keep heat-sensitive vaccines in the bottom of the 
basket
•	Arrange vaccines as per their expiry dates. (Early 
expiry should be kept above the later expiry ones).
•	ILR should be placed on a wooden platform, each 
ILR should be connected to a dedicated voltage 
stabilizer
•	Each ILR should be connected to a functional Data 
Logger for remote monitoring of temperature
•	Each ILR should have a separate logbook and 
temperature should be recorded twice daily•	Do not store any other 
drugs, serum, injections, 
diagnostic kits, /non-UIP 
vaccines in the ILR
•	Do not open the ILR 
frequently.
•	Do not keep food or drinking 
water in the ILR
•	Do not keep vaccines which 
have expired and have 
crossed the discard point of 
VVM
•	Do not disturb the 
thermostat setting 
frequently
•	Do not place heavy weight 
on the ILR
•	Do not store excess stock of 
vaccines, i.e. more than the 
maximum stock
Temperature of the data logger should also be monitored twice daily along with 
temperature recording from stem thermometer. However, the recording of the 
temperature in the register should be from alcohol stem thermometer only
Deep Freezer (DF): 
maintains cabinet temperature between -15°C to -25°C. Deep freezer at sub district level is 
used only for preparation of icepacks.
Fig. 6.4 Preparing of icepacks in the Deep freezer
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

90
Table 6.2. Dos and don’ts for DF use
Dos Don’ts
•	Use DF only for preparation of ice packs 
at PHC/ UPHC levels. But at the district 
level store, the bOPV, Measles Rubella 
lyophilized vials can be stored in DF
•	Should be kept on wooden platform 
•	Defrost the deep freezer when the frost on 
the wall is more than 5 mm•	Do not keep any vaccine in the DF at 
sub-district level
•	Never keep diluents in the deep 
freezer
Voltage Stabilizer:  is an electronic equipment to monitor and stabilize the range of 
fluctuations in the main incoming voltage to safeguard equipment from excessive voltage 
variation. Voltage stabilizers provide specified constant stabilized voltage to CCEs (ILRs & 
DFs) for its desired optimum operation & in turn protect vaccines.
•	There are predominantly three types of VS in the UIP:
1. Normal Voltage stabilizers: works in voltage range: 150 – 280 V
2. Low range voltage stabilizers: 90 – 280 V 
•	Every Cold-chain Equipment (ILR and DF) must be connected to an individual functional 
voltage stabilizer. A low voltage stabilizer should be used in areas with low voltage 
supply. Bypassing a voltage stabilizer can damage the CCE
•	Proper earthing should be available and connected
Fig. 6.5: Voltage stabilizer
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

91Cold Box:  is an insulated box, used for transportation and emergency storage of vaccines 
and icepacks. It is available in two sizes, large and small. It is used to: 
•	Collect and transport large quantities of vaccines
•	Store vaccines for transfer up to five days, if necessary for outreach sessions or when 
there is power cut
•	Store vaccines in case of breakdown of ILR as a contingency measure
•	Also used for storing frozen icepacks, e.g. during emergency and before campaigns
Packing a cold box: 
•	Ensure that the gasket of the cold box is intact and is not broken or damaged.
•	Place conditioned icepacks at the bottom and sides of the cold box
•	Load the vaccines in cardboard cartons or polythene bags
•	Never place freeze sensitive vaccines in direct contact with the icepacks. Surround them 
with OPV/BCG/JE (live) vaccines
•	Keep a thermometer in the cold box
•	Place 2 rows of conditioned icepacks above the vaccine vials
•	Place plastic sheet to cover the icepacks kept on top to ensure full hold over time
•	Securely close the lid of the cold box
•	Do not open the cold box unless needed
Fig. 6.6. Packing a cold box
 
Icepacks:  are plastic containers filled with water. These are hard frozen in the deep freezer. 
They are placed inside a vaccine carrier and cold box to improve and maintain the holdover 
time; also used in ILR as inside lining to improve & maintain holdover time during electricity 
failure. About 20-25 icepacks (8-10 Kg Ice) and 35-40 icepacks (12-14 Kg Ice) can be frozen in 
one day in small and large deep freezers respectively. Standard icepacks used in UIP for cold 
box and vaccine carrier are of 0.4 litre capacity. Fig.6.7. Picture of icepack
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

92Table 6.3 Dos and Don’ts in using icepacks
Dos Dont’s
•	Fill water only up to the level mark on the 
side to leave 10 mm room for expansion as 
water freezes
•	While filling, keep the ice pack vertically 
upwards under the tap
•	Fit the stopper and screw on the cap tight.
•	Check and ensure that ice pack does not leak
•	Clean the outer surface of ice packs with dry 
cloth before putting into the deep freezer
•	Keep ice packs horizontally (not flat) in a 
criss-cross manner in the DF (brick layered 
pattern see Fig 6.4)
•	Keep a gap/breathing space between ice 
packs for freezing to be faster and uniform.
•	Ensure use of conditioned ice packs when 
storing / transporting RI vaccines•	Do not use ice packs that are 
cracked and/or are without cap
•	Do not use ice packs with leakage; 
discard them
•	Never add salt to the water as it 
lowers the temperature to sub-zero 
level, which is not recommended as 
it may cause freeze damage to the 
vaccines
•	Do not refill an ice pack every time 
before use; the same water can be 
used repeatedly
•	Do not fill the water into the icepack 
above the marking
•	Do not use prefilled (coolant) 
icepacks (supplied with other drugs) 
in the vaccine carriers
Conditioning of frozen Icepacks:  Icepacks come out of the freezer at a temperature of 
about -20°C. They need to be kept at room temperature for a period of time to allow the ice 
at the core of the icepack to rise to 0°C. This takes at least 30-45 minutes in hot weather and 
much longer in cooler conditions – from 90 to 120 minutes at +20°C. This process is called 
‘conditioning’. 
•	Freeze sensitive vaccine like Hepatitis B, T series vaccines (DPT, Td, Penta), fIPV, PCV can 
be damaged if it comes in direct contact with the frozen icepacks 
•	Conditioning of icepacks prevents freezing of vaccines during transport
•	At start of session day, take all the frozen icepacks, you need from the freezer and close 
the door. Lay out on a table leaving a 5 cm space all round each icepack
•	Lay out icepacks, preferably in single rows but never in more than two rows
•	Wait until there is liquid water inside the icepacks. The ice pack is conditioned as soon 
as ice cores move inside the packs. An ice pack is adequately “conditioned” as soon as 
beads of water cover its surface and the crackling sound of water is heard on shaking itCOLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

93Fig. 6.8 Conditioning of frozen icepacks
Vaccine Carrier:  Two type of vaccine carrier are available in the system. One is the normal 
vaccine carrier and second is the freeze free vaccine carrier. It is an insulated box used for 
carrying vaccines (16-20 vials) and diluents from PHC/Cold-chain point to session sites and to 
bring back the open vials (under the open vial policy) from the session sites to the cold-chain 
point on same day after the session for storage and subsequent use. Vaccine carrier (with 4 
conditioned icepacks)  maintains the inside temperature between +2°C to +8°C for 12 hours, 
if not opened frequently. 
Packing a vaccine carrier:
•	Confirm that there are no cracks in the walls of the vaccine 
carrier
•	Take out the required number of icepacks from the deep 
freezer
Keep them outside for conditioning and wiped them dry 
before placing into carrier. 
•	Place four conditioned icepacks into the vaccine carrier 
along the sides
•	Bundling: 
o It is the procedure of vaccine and logistic packaging 
to ensure that the vaccines are always supplied with 
corresponding diluents, droppers, AD syringes and 
reconstitution syringes, in correct quantities, to the session site. Examples of bundling 
are as follows 
	OPV, RVV vials should be equal to the number of droppers and or RVV dispenser 
syringes
	MR and BCG vaccine vials and their respective supplied diluents (bundled diluent)* 
and 5 ml reconstitution syringes should be equal in number
* Bundled diluents are the one’s which are supplied with the vaccine by the 
manufacturer
Fig. 6.9 Packing icepacks 
in Vaccine carrier
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

94•	Put the vaccines with diluents in polythene zipper bag, ensure the zipper bag is zipped 
properly. Place some packing material between `T’ series vaccines (DPT, Td, Pentavalent 
and Hepatitis B vaccines) and the icepacks to prevent them from touching the icepacks
•	Place the plastic zipper bag in the centre away from the icepacks
•	Place foam pad on top of the icepacks
•	If more than one vaccine carrier is being carried, keep the whole range of the vaccines 
required for the day’s use in each carrier so that only one carrier is opened at a time
Fig. 6.10 Correct packing of the Vaccine Carrier   
Table 6.4. Dos and don’ts in using a vaccine carrier
Dos Dont’s
•	Place vaccines and diluents in cartons 
or polythene bags to ensure labels are 
protected
•	Use only conditioned ice packs in the 
vaccine carrier
•	Ensure that some ice is present in the ice 
packs while conducting the immunization 
session
•	Ensure collection of vaccines in the vaccine 
carrier on the session day itself
•	Close the lid tightly and securely
•	Keep the interior of the vaccine carrier 
clean and dry after every use•	Never use day carriers, which contain 
2 ice packs or thermos flasks for 
routine immunization
•	Never use a screwdriver or any other 
sharp shaft to open the lid of vaccine 
carrier
•	Do not drop, knock or sit on the 
vaccine carrier
•	Do not leave the vaccine carrier in the 
sunlight
•	Do not leave the lid open once 
packedCOLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

95Temperature monitoring 
Temperature recording is done in order to ensure that the vaccines are kept at recommended 
temperatures and the cold-chain equipment is working properly. A break in the cold-chain 
is indicated if the temperature rises above +8°C or falls below +2°C in the ILR and above-15°C 
in the DF. 
Dos and don’ts in temperature monitoring of vaccines is given in Table 6.5.
Alcohol stem thermometer 
Alcohol stem thermometers (Fig. 6.11) are very sensitive and more accurate than dial 
thermometers. They can record temperatures from -30°C to +50°C and can be used for ILRs 
or DFs.
Fig.6.11. Alcohol stem thermometer
Functional alcohol stem 
thermometer is the 
most commonly used 
temperature monitoring 
device under UIP. Each CCE 
should contain at least one 
functional thermometer. The 
thermometer should always 
be placed along with the 
vaccines.
•	Twice-daily readings from 
the stem thermometer 
must be entered in the 
individual temperature 
logbooks on all days 
including Sundays and 
holidays. As a MO, you must 
review the temperature 
logbooks for all CCE every 
month, including keeping 
a track of alarm events (if 
any)
•	It must be ensured that the cold-chain technician validates the reading of thermometer  
every year. Non-functional thermometers must be discarded using proper procedure
Temperature logbook
Temperature recording from the CCE should be entered twice daily (including Sundays and 
holidays) by the cold-chain handler in the Temperature logbook (Fig 6.12).
Temperature logbook should be used to take action to shift vaccines to cold boxes or other 
ILRs when the situation requires.
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

96Fig. 6.12. Logbook for ILR
 
(* 1 = Major, 2 = Minor)Comprehensive Log book for ILR Month & Year:  /  
Temperature/Date 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
M E M E M E M E M E M E M E M EM EMEM EM EM EMEMEMEMEMEMEM EM E M E M E M E M E M E M E M E M E M E M E
-2 and below ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
-1 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
0 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 1 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 2 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 3 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 4 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 5 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 6 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 7 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 8 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 9 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 10 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 11 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 12 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 13 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 14 ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
(+) 15 and above ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙∙ ∙ ∙∙∙ ∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
Power failure (in Hrs)
Defrosting & Cleaning Done (√)
Defect Reported to CCT (√)
CCT reported for repair (√)
Type of defect noticed (1 or 2)*
Equipment repaired (√)
Signature of VCCH
PPM Visit by CCT (Signature)
Supervisory visit (Signature)COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

97Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network (e-VIN) 
These devices are capable of transmitting temperature data from sensor placed inside Cold-
chain equipment to e-VIN server and subsequently programme managers and cold-chain 
handlers can view temperature remotely and receive SMS and email alerts as and when there 
is a temperature breach.
•	Identify if the e-VIN sensors are working. If the cold chain handler notices that the 
temperature of data loggers is outside the recommended range or shows temperature 
of previous days/ months for the particular equipment then, they should immediately 
inform district VCCM and district cold-chain technician through medical officer
•	e-VIN temperature records should be monitored twice daily. 
Fig.6.13: e-VIN equipments
 
Table No.6.5. Dos and don’ts in temperature monitoring of vaccines
Dos Don’ts
•	Keep one thermometer in each ILR and each DF
•	Designate VCCH to record the temperature twice 
daily for ILR/freezer used for storage of vaccines
•	Keep the booklet of 12 monthly temperature 
recording forms on the top of each unit
•	Write the serial number of ILR/deep freezer on the 
top of the temperature record book
•	Keep the thermometer in between the freeze 
sensitive vaccines inside the basket of the ILR
•	VCCH should sign on the temperature record book 
after recording temperature reading
•	MOIC to record the temperature and sign on the log 
book once every week
•	Preserve the temperature logbook of cold-chain 
equipment for a minimum period of three years
•	Do the shake test for T-series vaccines if 
temperature falls below +2°C•	Do not take the alcohol stem 
thermometer out of ILR while 
taking reading, as it is very 
sensitive CTX
U2GW Cold Trace 5 
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

98Vaccine sensitivities:
Vaccines lose their potency due to exposure to heat (temperature above +8°C), cold 
(temperature below + 2°C) and light. The loss of potency due to either exposure to heat or 
cold is permanent and cannot be regained.
Reconstituted BCG, MR and JE (Live) vaccines are the most heat and light sensitive. They 
should be used within 4 hours of  reconstitution . These light sensitive vaccines are supplied 
in amber-coloured vials.
Implementation of Open Vial Policy (OVP) allows reuse of partially used multi-dose vials 
of applicable vaccines under the UIP in subsequent sessions (both fixed and outreach) up 
to 4 weeks (28 days) subject to meeting certain conditions. This policy contributes to the 
reduction of vaccine  wastage. 
Open Vial Policy YES NO
Vaccines Hepatitis B, OPV, DPT , Pentavalent, Td, PCV, IPV, 
RVV (Liquid frozen 5 drops formulation), and JE 
(killed)BCG, MR, RVV (Liquid 
2ml formulation), JE 
(live)
Sensitivity of vaccines to heat, light and freezing: 
Vaccine Exposure to heat/light Exposure to cold
Heat & light sensitive vaccines
OPV & Rota with VVM on label Sensitive to heat Not damaged by freezing
MR & BCG Sensitive to heat & light Not damaged by freezing
Freeze sensitive vaccines
IPV, DPT, Pentavalent, JE & Rota 
with VVM on capSensitive to heat Damaged by freezing
Hepatitis B, PCV & Td Relatively heat stable Damaged by freezing
At the Sub district level, all vaccines are kept in the ILR at temperature of +2°C to +8°C
Vaccines sensitive to heat
• OPV
• Rotavirus vaccine
• IPV
• DPT/Pentavalent/MR
• BCG/JE/Td
• PCV/HepBVaccines sensitive to freezing
• DTP/Pentavalent/HepB/PCV/Td
• IPV
Only those diluents that are provided with the vaccine by the manufacturer should be used. 
Keep diluents in an ILR at +2°C to +8°C at least 24 hours before use  to ensure that the 
vaccine and diluent are at the same temperature when being reconstituted.
6.3. Checking vaccines for correct maintenance of cold-chain
A. Checking the vaccines for heat damage
Vaccine Vial Monitor: 
A VVM attached to vaccine vials is also a temperature monitoring device that records 
cumulative heat exposure over time. The combined effect of time and temperature cause Most Most
Least LeastCOLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

99the inner square of the VVM to darken gradually and irreversibly. Before opening a vial, check 
the status of the VVM. If the VVM shows change in colour to the end point, then discard the 
vaccines.
Fig. No.6.14: Vaccine vial monitor:
Procedure of checking VVM:
Hold the vial as shown in the picture. The background should be covered by palm and the 
direction of light should fall on the VVM.  
Fig. 6.15: Holding of vial for checking VVM:
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

100B. Checking vaccines for cold damage (freezing) 
DPT, Td, IPV, HepB, PCV and Penta vaccines lose their potency if frozen. Moreover, the risk of 
adverse events following immunization, such as sterile abscesses, may increase. Discard the 
vial if it is frozen or it contains floccules after shaking. Shake Test is not applicable for IPV.
Details of shake test are given in MoHFW’s Handbook for Vaccine & Cold-chain Handlers.
Fig. 6.16: Procedure of Shake test
Shake Test Passed - Vaccine usable                       Shake Test Failed - Do not use Vaccine
Table 6.6: Dos and don’ts in cold-chain and vaccine sensitivities
Do’s Don’ts
•	Keep all vaccines in ILR at +2°C to +8°C at PHC
•	Use diluent provided by the manufac turer with 
the vaccine
•	Keep diluents in ILR at +2°C to +8°C atleast 24 
hours before use
•	Use Rotavirus vaccine (RVV with VVM on cap/
stem), reconstituted   BCG, JE (live) and MR 
within 4 hours
•	Discard all damaged vials for disinfection and 
disposal•	Do not keep in the cold-chain:
o Expired vials,
o Frozen vials or
o Vials with VVM beyond the 
end point
•	Do not use Rotavirus vaccines 
(RVV with VVM on cap/ stem), 
or re- constituted BCG, JE (live) 
and MR vaccines after  4 hours
6.4. Guidelines for use of open vaccine vials in immunization programme:18
Implementation of Open Vial Policy allows reuse of partially used multi dose vials of applicable 
vaccines under UIP in subsequent session (both fixed and outreach) up to four weeks (28 
days) subject to meeting certain conditions and thus reduces vaccine wastage. Open Vial 
Policy is applicable on DPT, Td, Hepatitis B, Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV), Pentavalent vaccine, 
Injectable-Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine (IPV), RVV (RVV with VVM on Label), JE- (Killed), and 
PCV. Open Vial Policy  does not apply  to MR, RVV with VVM on cap/ stem, BCG and JE (live) 
vaccines. As a basic principle open vial policy is not applicable to vaccines with VVM on cap 
and on vaccine supplied in single-dose presentation.
Conditions that must be fulfilled for the use of open vial policy: 
Any vial of the applicable vaccines opened/used in a session (fixed or outreach) can be used COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

101at more than one immunization session up to four weeks (28 days) provided that: 
•	Date and Time of opening of the vial is visible on the vial
•	The expiry date has not passed
•	The Vaccine Vial Monitor (VVM) is in Usable stage
•	The vaccines are stored under appropriate cold-chain conditions both during 
transportation and storage in cold-chain storage points
•	The vaccine vial septum has not been submerged in water from melted icepack or 
contaminated in any way
•	Aseptic technique has been used to withdraw vaccine doses. (That is needle/septum has 
not been contaminated in any way)
Discard the vaccine vial in case any one of the following conditions is met: 
•	Expiry date has passed
•	VVM reached/crossed discard point (for freeze-dried vaccine, before reconstitution only) 
or vaccine vials without VVM or disfigured / nonreadable VVM
•	No label/partially torn label and/or writing on the label/ vial not legible
•	Any vial thought to be exposed to non-sterile procedure for withdrawal
•	Open vials that have been under water or vials removed from a vaccine carrier that has 
water
•	If the vaccine vial contains floccules or any foreign body
•	If there is a breakage in the continuity of the vials (crack/leaks)
•	If there is any reported AEFI following use of any of the vaccine 
vial, do not use it, and retain it safely in proper cold-chain and 
properly sealed zipper bag earmarked “For AEFI Investigation” 
in a separate Cold-chain Equipment (+2° to +8° C) under 
special custody and in the knowledge of Medical Officer. This 
vial should never be issued to anyone unless authorized by 
DIO
Health workers must be able to distinguish between vials that can 
be used in subsequent sessions and vials that must be discarded.
Cold-chain maintenance during vaccine distribution: 
•	Maintain temperature of ILR between +20 to +80C for storage of vaccines & diluents and 
monitor temperature twice daily regularly including Sundays/holidays
•	Note the name of the manufacturer, batch number and expiry date of the vaccine and 
diluent in the stock register
•	Always fill the injectable vaccine only immediately before giving vaccine. Never prefill the 
injectable vaccine in anticipation of vaccination of next beneficiary
•	Proper recording and reporting of vaccine distribution and usage has to be ensured
•	Keep stock up to date, don’t over-stock or under-stock vaccines and diluent
•	Multi-dose vials from which at least one dose has been removed may be at risk of 
contamination of the vial septum. These vials should, therefore, never be allowed to be 
submerged in water (from melted ice for example) and the septum should remain clean 
and dry
•	Observe early expiry first out (EEFO) policy for issuing vaccines. If the vaccines are of same 
expiry date, the partially used vaccine vials should be re-issued. The vial opened earlier, 
as recorded on the label of the vial, should be issued first
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

102•	Contingency plan must be in place in case of any exigency like power failure, equipment 
breakdown, etc.
 
Cold-chain maintenance during the immunization session: 
•	Inspect for and discard vaccine vial with visible contamination (i.e. checking for any 
change in the appearance of vaccine or any floating particles) or breaches of integrity 
(e.g. cracks, leaks)
•	All vaccines vials must be marked (in permanent marker) with date & time of opening 
on the cap of the vial at first use. 
•	Note the name of the manufacturer, batch number and expiry date of the vaccine and 
diluent in the tally sheet
•	Do not keep freeze sensitive vaccines like Hepatitis B, Pentavalent, DPT, Td, PCV and JE 
(Inactivated) vaccines on the ice pack. BCG, OPV, MR, RVV and JE (live attenuated) vaccines 
on the ice pack as shown in fig. 5.2.
•	Always pierce the septum with a sterile needle/adapter for drawing vaccine from the 
multi-dose vials being used. OPV vial dropper should be recapped with stopper (small 
cap) after each use and kept on the icepack
Fig. 6.17. Magnifying glass for reading vaccine vial labels
Field tip:  Small handheld magnifying glasses were distributed 
to all ANMs in a district to enable them to read the small print of 
the vaccines vials. This has made it easier to see the small print 
and encouraged them to check the vaccine vials before using!!!
Fig. 6.18. Placement of vaccines at the RI session site: 
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

103Specific attention while implementing open vial policy: 
•	Open Vial Policy is NOT applicable to opened reconstituted vials of MR and BCG 
•	Open Vial Policy is NOT applicable to opened vials of Rotavirus vaccine with VVM on Cap
•	All vaccine vials have VVM appropriately displayed on them. The vaccine has to be used 
before reaching the end point
•	If any AEFI occurred following use of any of the vial, do not use that vial, mark it and 
retain safely for AEFI investigation
After immunization session is over: 
•	ANM should segregate all the vaccine vials (used and unused) and keep it inside in a 
properly sealed zipper pouch/bag in the vaccine carrier under the cold-chain (reverse cold-
chain). All the vials used/unused/partially used including the empty vial must be returned 
to tagged CCP
•	Under no circumstance, the vaccine carrier/vaccines will be kept at the session site 
without cold-chain maintenance. It should also be ensured that under no circumstances, 
the vaccine carrier or vaccine vial is kept in the house of health care worker. The vaccine 
should never be stored in domestic refrigerator of any health care worker’s house. In such 
an instance, the vials should be discarded and not used for subsequent sessions
At the Vaccine storage/cold-chain point at the end of Immunization Day: 
•	Cold-chain handler should ensure appropriate segregation of the vaccines into opened 
and unopened vials, and follow the instructions as below: 
Unopened vials: 
1. If VVM is intact and in usable stage, retain the vial in ILR as per guideline, and issue 
accordingly.
2. If VVM is not in usable stage or there is partial/complete defacement of the label, retain 
the vial in a plastic box clearly marked “Not to be used”  in a separate Cold-chain 
Equipment (+20 to +80 C). Such vial should be discarded after 48 hours.
Opened vials: 
1. Segregate the vials on which Open Vial Policy is not applicable such as BCG/MR/RVV 
with VVM on the Cap/ stem, JE (live) vaccine to retain in a plastic box clearly marked 
“Not to be used” in a separate Cold-chain Equipment (+20 to +80 C). These vials should 
be discarded after 48 hours. In case of any reported AEFI they will not be discarded but 
retain in proper cold-chain for investigation. 
2. Segregate the vials for which Open Vial Policy is applicable such as OPV/Td/DPT/
Hepatitis-B/Pentavalent/IPV/PCV/JE(Killed)/RVV with VVM on Label as below: 
a. If VVM is intact and is in usable stage, expiry date not passed, and the written date 
& time of vial opening is readable then retain the vaccine vial in ILR as per guideline 
subjected to condition that vial is within 28 days of opening and reissue in the next 
session after ensuring that it has not passed 28 days of opening the vial.
b. If VVM is intact and is in usable stage, expiry date not passed, and the written 
date & time of vial opening is readable but the vaccine vial has crossed 28 days of 
opening. These vials should be discarded after ascertaining that these vials are not 
required for AEFI investigation. 
c. If VVM is not in usable stage or there is partial/complete defacement of the label, 
retain in a plastic box clearly marked “Not to be used” in a separate Cold-chain 
Equipment (+20 to +80C). These vaccine vials should be discarded after 48 hours or 
before the next session whichever is earlier. 
3. If there is any vial which has been used and there is report of AEFI, that vial (even if it 
COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

104is in usable stage) has to be kept separately in proper cold-chain and properly sealed 
zipper bag earmarked “For AEFI Investigation”  in a separate Cold-chain Equipment 
(+20 to +80C) under special custody and in the knowledge of Medical Officer. This vial 
should never be issued to anyone unless authorized by DIO. 
•	The Cold-chain handler should document the return of used (complete/partial) and 
unused vials in the vaccine distribution register.COLD-CHAIN AND VACCINE MANAGEMENT

105Safe injection practices and  
Waste disposalUnit 7

106Key contents Page
7.1. Importance of safe injection practices 107
7.2. Simple ways to improve injection safety 107
7.3. Correct use of Auto-Disable (AD) syringes 109
7.4. Immunization waste segregation guideline 111
7.5. Steps to ensure safe disposal of immunization waste 112Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, you should be able to: 
• To describe the importance of safe injections and ways to improve 
injection safety 
• To demonstrate how to use AD Syringes correctly 
• To explain the steps to ensure safe disposal of immunization waste 
as per BMWM Guidelines 2021

1077.1. Importance of safe injection practices1
A safe injection is one that – 
(a) Does not harm the recipient 
(b) Does not expose the health workers to any avoidable risks 
(c) Does not result in waste, which is dangerous for the community
The most common, serious infections transmitted by unsafe injections are Hepatitis B, 
Hepatitis C, and HIV (the virus that causes AIDS). Poorly administered injections can also 
cause injuries or drug toxicity when the wrong injection site, vaccine, diluent, or dose is used. 
It is important to prevent the risks of accidental needle-stick injury, and necessary to dispose 
off used syringes and needles safely to prevent risks to the community at large.
The provision of auto disabled syringes by the Government of India and the implementation 
of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) outlined waste management procedures are 
attempts to improve injection safety in the immunization programme.
Fig. 7.1 Impacts of unsafe injections
7.2. Simple ways to improve injection safety 1, 20
•	Keep hands clean before giving injections
•	Wash hands prior to preparing injection material 
•	Hands should be washed for 40–60 seconds with soap and running water and dry 
before start of session 
•	Not to use alcohol-based sanitizers
SAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSALSafe injection practices 
and Waste disposal

108•	Before vaccination, inspect the area of injection. Avoid giving injections if the skin at 
the site of injection is compromised by any local infection such as a skin lesion, cut, or 
weeping dermatitis. 
Fig. no. 7.2. Hand washing technique using soap
 
Use of soap and water Duration of entire procedure: 40-60 seconds
Wet hands with water & apply 
enough soap to cover all hand 
surfacesRub hands palm to palm Right palm over back of left 
palm with interlaced /f_ingers 
and vice versaPalm to palm with /f_ingers 
interlaced
Backs of /f_ingers to opposing 
palms with /f_ingers interlockedRotational rubbing of left 
thumb clasped in right palm 
and vice versaRotational rubbing, backwards 
and forwards with clasped /f_ingers 
of right hand in left palm and vice 
versaRinse hands with water, dry 
hands thoroughly with a single 
use towel.
•	Use sterile injection equipment, every time 
•	Always use Auto Disabled syringe for each 
injection and a new disposable syringe to 
reconstitute each vial of BCG, MR and JE (live).
•	Prevent the contamination of vaccine and 
injection equipment 
•	Prepare each injection in a designated clean 
area where contamination from blood or body 
fluid is unlikely
•	Check if the vaccine vial has a usable Vaccine 
Vial Monitor (VVM), has readable manufacturing details, is within the expiry date, and 
has not crossed beyond 28 days from the date of first opening it (if under open vial 
policy) and date of opening is clearly written on the vial
•	Always pierce the rubber cap (septum) of the vial with a sterile needle
•	DO NOT touch the needle or rubber cap (septum) of a vial with your finger
•	Follow product-specific recommendations for the use, storage, and handling of a 
vaccine
•	Discard any needle that has touched any non-sterile surface
•	Ensure and check that the diluent supplied by the manufacturer for the respective 
vaccine is used at vaccination sites and is within the expiry period
•	DO NOT use any vaccine vial or diluent with visible contamination or breaches of 
integrity (e.g. cracks, leaks)
•	DO NOT use a needle or syringe if the package has been punctured, torn, or exposed to 
moisture, defaced, contaminated, etc.
•	NEVER leave a needle in the septum of the vial
•	Fill the vaccine in the syringe just before injecting the beneficiary. Do not keep syringes 
prefilled
•	Use separate and new syringe & needle for reconstitution of vaccine every time. Reuse 
of the same syringe/needle for reconstitution is strictly forbidden 
SAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL

109•	Cut the hub of the used syringe with hub cutter 
immediately after use.
•	If the injection site is dirty, clean it with clean dry swab
•	Always pierce the rubber cap of the vial with a sterile 
needle
•	Ensure opened vial septum is covered to prevent 
contamination
•	Follow product-specific recommendations for use, 
storage, and handling of a vaccine
•	Assume all used equipment is contaminated 
•	Cut the used syringe at the hub immediately after use
•	Practice safe disposal of all medical sharps waste 
•	Used sharps (needles) must be collected in a hub cutter 
and then carried for safe disposal
•	Prevent needle-stick injuries 
•	Do not recap or bend needles
•	Collect sharps in a puncture proof container (Hub cutter)
•	Anticipate sudden movement of the child
7.3. Correct use of Auto-Disable (AD) syringes 
AD syringes have a fixed needle and are pre-sterilized in a sealed pack. They can only be used 
once. They are available in two sizes with vaccine drawing capacity of 0.1 ml and 0.5 ml.
Fig. 7.3. Correct use of AD syringes
 
•	Select the correct syringe for the vaccine to be administered: 0.1ml for BCG, fIPV and 0.5ml 
for all others
•	Check the packaging. Don’t use if the package is damaged, opened, or expired
SAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL
Do not recap the needle

110•	Peel open or tear the package from the plunger side and remove the syringe by holding 
the barrel. Discard the packaging into a black plastic bag
•	Remove the needle cover/cap and discard it into the black plastic bag
•	Do not move the plunger until you are ready to fill the syringe with the vaccine and do not 
inject air into the vial as this will lock the syringe
•	Take the appropriate vaccine vial, invert the vial, and insert the needle into the vial through 
the septum at 90°. Insert the needle such that the tip is within the level of the vaccine. If 
inserted beyond that, you may draw an air bubble which is very difficult to expel
•	Do not touch the needle or the rubber cap (septum) of the vial
•	Pull the plunger back slowly to fill the syringe. The plunger will automatically stop 
when the necessary dose of the vaccine has been drawn (0.1 ml or 0.5 ml). Follow the 
manufacturer’s instruction
•	Do not draw air into the syringe. In case air accidentally enters the syringe, remove 
the needle from the vial. Holding the syringe upright, tap the barrel to bring the bubbles 
towards the tip of syringe. Then carefully push the plunger to the dose mark (0.5 or 0.1 ml) 
thus expelling the air bubble
•	Clean the injection site (if dirty) with a clean dry swab, no alcohol swab to be used
•	Administer the vaccine as specified in the National Immunization Schedule (Refer Unit-3)
•	Push the plunger completely to deliver the dose. Do not rub the injection site after 
vaccine is given
•	Do not re-cap the needle. Cut the hub of the syringe immediately after use with hub 
cutter that collects the sharps in its puncture proof container
•	Then collect the plastic portion of the cut syringes in a red plastic bag
•	Follow the guidelines for waste disposal as given in next section
Fig. 7.4 Usage of Auto Disabled syringe
Tear the package
from the plunger
sideNeedleHub
Syringe
Remove the needle cap
by holding the syringe
(not plunger)Invert the vial and
insert the needle
through the septumAfter withdrawing the
vaccine, tap the barrel
to bring the bubbles
towards the tipPlungerNeedle Cap
Using the hub cutter correctly:
•	Hub cutter is used at the immunization session site (outreach/ mobile) for cutting hub 
and needle of the used syringes immediately after useSAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL

111•	It segregates infected sharps into a puncture proof container and thus prevents injury to 
service provider, beneficiary and community members 
•	Immediately after use, insert the syringe in the hub cutter and then cut it from the hub
•	Other sharps such as broken vial diluent ampoules at the session site should also be 
stored in Hub cutter. This should be done by collecting broken vials and ampoules on 
paper and putting it in hub cutter after opening the lid
•	Never touch any sharp (cut needles, broken vials or ampoules) 
•	Immediately after use, carefully insert the hub with needle of used syringe (and not just 
the metal part of the needle) into the insertion hole 
•	If the functional hub cutter is not available, immediately inform vaccine storage point 
cold-chain handler/ MOIC
Fig. 7.5 Using the hub cutter correctly
 
Infection Prevention and control (IPC) practices: IPC practices are encouraged at all the 
sessions to prevent spread of disease during vaccination.
7.4. Immunization waste segregation guideline21
The immunization waste needs to be correctly segregated right at the site of the generation. 
SAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL

112Table 7.1: Summary of the segregation guidelines 
Logistics 
used during 
vaccinationParticulars Type of Bag or Container to be used as 
per CPCB UIP Guidelines, 2021
AD Syringes 
with packingCut hub of AD and disposable 
syringesWHITE 
[White coloured translucent, puncture-
proof, leak-proof, tamper-proof 
containers]
Plastic part of syringe RED
[Red coloured non-chlorinated plastic 
bags (having thickness > 50 micron or 
containers)]Vaccine parts Vaccine adaptor & dropper
Oral syringe
Gloves Used gloves
Ampoules Ampoules (plastic)
Ampoules (glass) BLUE
[Container / Cardboard boxes with 
blue coloured marking or blue 
coloured puncture proof, temper proof 
containers]Vaccines Expired vaccine
Or Discarded vaccine
Broken vials
Empty unbroken vials
Cotton Cotton contaminated with 
Blood or body fluidYELLOW
[Yellow coloured non-chlorinated plastic 
bags (having thickness > 50 micron or 
containers)]Vitamins Expired Bottles of Vitamins
Paracetamol Expired tab/ Syrup
For outreach RI sessions, hub cutter may be used for broken vials.
7.5. Steps to ensure safe disposal of immunization waste
Step 1: At the session site, ANMs to cut the needle of the AD syringe immediately after 
administering the injection using the hub cutter that cuts the plastic hub of the syringe and 
not the metal part of needle. The cut needles will get collected in the puncture-proof container 
of the hub cutter This is to prevent needle stick injuries (NSI) associated with recapping and 
any re-usage of needles.
Fig.7.6 Correct usage of hub cutter
 
Step 2:  Segregate and store the plastic portion of the cut syringes and plastic ampoules/
plastic diluents into the red bag/container . At outreach session site, red bag to carry 
plastic portion of the syringes, used cotton swabs contaminated with blood and used but SAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL

113unbroken vials, discarded medicines, empty vit A bottles.  The bags or containers should 
bear the biohazard symbol.
Step 3:  Store the broken vials/ diluents/ vitamin A bottles in a separate sturdy and puncture 
proof container or in the same hub cutter , in case its capacity is also able to accommodate 
broken vials.
Step 4:  Packaging material, plastic wrappers of the syringe, empty paper/ cardboard boxes 
and cap of the needle to go into black bag  or container as a dry general waste. Dispose off 
the black bag as general waste.
Step 5: From an outreach session send the red, black bag, and the hub cutter to designated 
Cold-chain Point (PHC/UPHC/DH/SDH/RH/CHC) OR Health Care Facility (HCF) for disinfection 
and disposal by the designated person at the HCF or CCP following biomedical waste 
guidelines. 
Health facilities and workers (government and private) should follow the national 
guidelines issued by MOHFW and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) 2021 for 
treatment and disposal of Immunization Waste.
Step 6:  Wash the hub cutters properly with freshly prepared 1% sodium hypochlorite before 
reuse.
Step 7:  Maintain a proper record of waste generation, treatment and disposal of waste at 
the district hospital/CHC/PHC/UPHC to assess whether the waste (needles/syringes/vials) 
reported back matches with the stock issued to health worker/ vaccinator at the beginning 
of each session day.
 
Preparation of Bleaching Solutions
As chloride solutions gradually loose strength, it is highly advised that freshly prepared 
solution with clean water should be used daily and use within 24 hours of prepartions. 
Since these are caustic solutions, avoid direct contact with skin and eyes. Use ONLY  plastic 
containers for prepartion and storage, as metalic containers are corroded rapidly and also 
affects the quality of bleach. 
From bleaching powder:
To prepare 1% Hypochlorite solution, dissolve 10-15 gm OR 1 tablespoonful of beaching 
powder in 1 litre of water in a well-ventilated area. 
From liquid bleach solution: 
•	From commercially available 5% liquid bleaching solution – prepare 1% hypochlorite 
solution, dissolve 200 ml bleaching solution (5% concentration) in 800 ml clean water in a 
well ventilated area
•	From commercially available 10% liquid bleaching solution – prepare 1% hypochlorite 
solution, dissolve 100 ml bleaching solution (10% concentration) in 900 ml clean water in 
a well ventilated area
SAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL

114Fig.7.7 Pictorial flow chart – disinfection and disposal sharps waste from RI session 
 
Record Maintenance
Maintain proper records of waste generation, transportation, treatment, and disposal at 
CCP/ HCF. It should include: 
•	Log of all waste generated from the immunization activity (outreach sessions, fixed 
sessions, Covid vaccination sessions & CCPs)
•	All records of collection of waste from CBWTF
•	Records of needle stick injuries 
•	Logbook of each cycle of treatment with all details such as time, date, weight, duration 
and hours of treatment 
•	All records must be supervised and audited by MO in-charge on monthly basisSAFE INJECTION PRACTICES AND WASTE DISPOSAL

115Conducting the Routine 
immunization sessionUnit 8

116Key contents Page
8.1. Steps in holding an immunization session 
• Preparing for the session
• Communicating with caregivers
• Assessing infants & pregnant females for vaccination 
• Giving safe vaccinations
• Closing the session
• Recording data117
8.2. Using the immunization session checklist 132
8.3. Birth dose vaccination protocol 133Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, health worker should be able:
• To make preparations for conducting the routine immunization 
sessions
• To conduct Routine immunization session using correct 
communication, assessment and vaccine administration techniques 

117Health workers should follow the following important tasks to ensure the quality of an 
immunization session1
8.1. Steps in managing an immunization session:
I. Preparing for the session:
a) Select an appropriate immunization site 
Ideally, it should be: 
•	easily accessible, acceptable and identified - using the IEC posters / banner at a visible 
point
•	the place of session site in an area should be the same as per the microplan and 
preferably it should not be changed
•	in a clean area, out of exposure to sun and rain – No open-air sites
•	space for registration and recording, should be available 
•	having adequate space: 
o a waiting area for beneficiaries
o a separate area for vaccinators to vaccinate children – preferably out of view of 
other beneficiaries and 
o area for waiting after the vaccine is administered
Getting a good space for RI session site: 
In most situations the Anganwadi centre or the Sub-centre or Health and wellness centre space 
is used for immunization sessions. Wherever the session site is very small and unsuitable, 
ANM should explore for better options.
During meetings with panchayat / ward members always discuss the requirement for a good 
session site. Involve the ANMs, ASHA/AWW/Link worker to support.
Furniture like tables, chairs, benches and mats are to be sourced from local areas / neighbours. 
This involves the community and creates a supportive environment.
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSIONConducting the Routine 
immunization session

118b) Arrange for the equipment and supplies required
Furniture 
o A table to keep vaccines and injection 
equipment 
o A seat for a parent to sit while holding 
a child for vaccination and a seat for 
the HW 
o Bench for beneficiaries in waiting area 
o Bench or mats for beneficiaries after 
vaccination – post vaccination area 
o Two small buckets for the red and 
black bags and blue puncture proof 
container  
o Water for drinking 
o Area for washing hands 
Immunization records: 
o MCP card / immunization cards 
o Due list and head count survey records
o RCH register 
o IEC material – poster or banner 
o Immunization tally sheets 
o ALWAYS CARRY THE MOBILE PHONE 
WHICH IS REGISTERED ON U-WINLogistics: 
o AD syringes 
o Metal file to open ampoules 
o 5 ml disposable syringes (mixing or 
reconstitution syringes) 
o CD Marker for writing date and time on 
vaccine vials 
o Dry Cotton swabs 
o Hub cutter 
o Black and Red bags for waste disposal and 
blue puncture proof container if hub cutter 
not available 
o Anaphylaxis management kit 
o BP apparatus* 
o Weighing machine* 
Vaccine carrier with 4 conditioned ice packs: 
o Paracetamol syrup (125 mg / 5 ml strength) 
with measuring cap having markings for 
2.5, 5.0, 7.5 and 10ml
o Vaccines and diluents 
o Vitamin A, ORS, Zinc and IFA tablets*
*Items to be included when immunization session is part of Village Health and Nutrition Day (VHND)
c) Prepare due list of beneficiaries and share with AWW and ASHA for mobilizing 
beneficiaries 
Refer to the following documents:
•	Counterfoils of immunization cards 
•	U-WIN duelist
•	MCH / Immunization register 
•	Register of AWW and ASHA 
Fig. 8.1. Ideal layout of vaccination site:
 
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

119d) Arrange the vaccination session site 
Place everything you need within reach. On the table you should keep 
•	Vaccine carrier 
•	Hub Cutter 
•	Immunization cards and records 
•	Dry Cotton swabs 
Keep red and black bags, blue puncture proof container/ hub cutter for disposing immunization 
waste. Also keep a bowl, water and soap for washing hands clean before beginning the 
vaccination session and every time your hands come in contact with any un-sterile surface.
e) Cold-chain maintenance during immunization session:
•	Inspect for and discard vaccine vial with visible contamination (i.e. checking for any 
change in the appearance of vaccine e.g. Frozen or any floating particles which do not 
dissolve after shaking gently) or breaches of integrity (e.g. cracks, leaks)
•	All vaccines vials must be marked with date & time of opening at first use
•	Note the name of the manufacturer, batch number and expiry date of the vaccine and 
diluent in the tally sheet
•	Do not keep freeze sensitive vaccines like Hepatitis, Pentavalent, DPT, Td, IPV, PCV & 
JE killed vaccines on the ice pack. BCG, OPV, MR, RVV and JE (live attenuated) vaccines 
on the ice pack as shown in fig. 6.18.
•	ALWAYS VERIFY that you are USING THE CORRECT VACCINE for administration
•	Always pierce the septum with a sterile needle/adapter for drawing vaccine from 
the multi-dose vials being used. “DO NOT TOUCH SEPTUM BEFORE OR AFTER 
WITHDRAWING OF VACCINE”
•	OPV vial dropper should be recapped with stopper (small cap) after each use and kept 
on the icepack
NOTE: 
• Well-sealed conditioned icepacks should be used in vaccine carriers and water should 
not be allowed to accumulate where the vials are stored. Vaccine vials must be 
transported in properly locked plastic zipper bag
• Multi-dose vials from which at least one dose has been removed may be at risk of 
contamination of the vial septum. These vials should, therefore, never be allowed to 
be submerged in water (from melted ice for example) and the septum should remain 
clean and dry
• Proper recording and reporting of vaccine distribution and usage has to be ensured
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

120Fig. 8.2. Placement of vaccines at the RI session site: 
Fig. 8.3. Magnifying glass for reading vaccine vial labels
Field tip:  Small handheld magnifying glasses were distributed 
to all ANMs in a district to enable them to read the small print of 
the vaccines vials. This has made it easier to see the small print 
and encouraged them to check the vaccine vials before using!!!
Specific attention while implementing open vial policy: 
•	Open Vial Policy is NOT applicable to opened reconstituted vials of BCG, MR and JE-live 
attenuated vaccine
•	Open Vial Policy is NOT applicable to opened vials of Rotavirus vaccine with VVM on Cap/
stem
•	All vaccine vials have VVM appropriately displayed on them. The vaccine has to be used 
before reaching the end point (except reconstituted vials of BCG, MR, JE live, and RVV with 
VVM on Cap/Stem, should be used within 4 hours of opening the vial or the session end, 
whichever is earlier)
•	If any AEFI occurred following use of any of the vial, do not use that vial, mark it and retain 
safely for AEFI investigation
Bundling always ensure that Diluent and vaccine (BCG & MR) are supplied from the same 
manufacturer. Do not use diluent & vaccine of different manufacturer
II. Communicating with caregivers:
Vaccinators should always have soft communication skills during vaccination of beneficiaries. 
Communication involves giving information verbally (including the tone of voice) and non-
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

121verbally (body language). Most communication is non-verbal. It is conveyed in many ways: 
posture, facial expression, gestures, eye contact and attitude. For example, welcoming 
families to an immunization session with a smile and a calm manner will reassure those who 
may be afraid or worried of injections.
At the start
•	Greet the caregiver or parent in a friendly manner. Thank them for coming for vaccination 
and for their patience if they had to wait
•	Ask the caregiver if they have any questions or concerns and answer them politely
During assessment
•	Write the date of the vaccinations being given on the immunization card and complete 
entries on U-WIN and explain the diseases against which the vaccination protects, use 
simple terms (in the local language). If there is a poster or chart, use it to help your 
explanation
•	Mention possible adverse events and explain how to handle them
•	Explain the need for the child/beneficiary to return as per the immunization schedule to 
be fully protected. Use the immunization card as an instructional guide and congratulate 
the caretaker if the child has completed a series
•	Write the date for the next vaccination on the immunization card and tell the caregiver. If 
appropriate, associate the date with a well-known day, such as a holiday or festival that 
will help them remember to return to complete their immunization schedule
•	Ask the caregiver to repeat the date to be sure it is understood
•	Explain to the caregiver that if the child cannot come on the return date, they can obtain 
the next vaccination at another location or another date close to the due date
•	Remind the caregiver to bring the immunization card when they bring the child back for 
the next vaccination
•	Inform them to always carry the immunization card. If they are travelling to other places 
during the next vaccination date, inform them that they can vaccinate their child / 
pregnant woman anywhere in the country if they have the vaccination card with them
They should remind parents about four key messages which are as follows:
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

122Fig. no.8.4. Delivery of four key messages after vaccination
Proceed with vaccination, including explanation of positioning, as described later.
After vaccination 
•	Always ask the beneficiary to wait for 30 minutes to observe for any adverse reactions
•	Remind the caregiver when to return with the infant. The date of next vaccination as per 
UIP schedule will be auto filled in the e-vaccination certificate generated in U-WIN
•	In the event of any out-of-stocks of vaccine at the time of the session, inform the caregiver 
where and when to return for the next doses
•	Remind the caregiver about other services given during immunization session; for 
example, vitamin A supplementation or Td vaccine for women
•	If immunization campaigns are planned in the coming months, inform the caregivers about 
the date of the campaign, what vaccination is being given, and where the vaccination site 
will be
•	Offer relevant print information to caregivers who are literate
•	Ask the caregiver if they have any questions or concerns and answer them politely
III. Assessing infants for vaccination:
a) Eligibility for immunization
•	Verify the infant’s age on the immunization card or ask the caregiver in case the card 
is not available
•	Check due vaccines on U-WIN. If the beneficiary is not registered in U-WIN, then register 
them on U-WIN
•	Verify which vaccines the infant has received by reviewing the immunization card or 
ask the caregiver in case the card is not available. Fill a new cardCONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

123•	Verify all vaccines the infant needs at this session to allow efficient preparation
o If the infant is eligible for more than one type of vaccine, it is safe to give  ALL  
the different vaccines to one child at different injection sites during the same 
session 
o If the baby has regurgitated the administered oral vaccines (OPV & Rota), the health 
worker should repeat the complete dose in the same immunization session. 
o If the vaccine is delayed, do not restart the schedule. Simply provide the next 
needed dose in the series
•	If there is a delay in starting the immunization schedule, give the due vaccine(s) and 
an appointment for the next dose at the interval as recommended in the national 
immunization schedule
b) Assess for the possible contraindications
All infants should be immunized except in these situations: 
•	Do not vaccinate severely sick child, ask the caregiver to come on next available 
session after the child recovers
•	Do not give a vaccine if the infant has had anaphylaxis (a serious allergic reaction) or 
other severe reaction to a previous dose of the vaccine or a vaccine component
•	Vaccination of a known immunocompromised (HIV/ on steroid/ chemotherapy, etc.) 
child should be done in consultation with the treating physician
•	High fever (>38.5°C). Do not give a vaccine if the caregiver objects to immunization 
for a sick infant after explanation that mild illness is not a contraindication. Ask the 
caregiver to come back when the infant is well
•	Vaccinate malnourished children as per schedule as they are more prone for 
vaccine preventable diseases
IV. Giving vaccinations:
Sequence of vaccines administered at different schedule in UIP is explained in unit 3.
a) Good oral administration technique : Administer oral vaccines before injectable vaccines 
OPV and Rotavirus vaccines are the oral vaccines in the national immunization schedule. 
Do not vaccinate child who is sleeping. Do not give oral vaccine to a crying baby. Wait 
for baby to stop crying.
Position:  Use the cuddle position on the caregiver’s lap with the head supported and 
tilted slightly back. Vaccinator stands to one side (see Table 8.1).
Administration:  Open the infant’s mouth by gently squeezing the cheeks between your 
thumb and index finger using gentle pressure. Firm squeezing can cause distress. NEVER 
pinch the nose to open the mouth of child.
•	Ensure that, two drops of OPV and five drops/2ml of rotavirus vaccine fall from the 
dropper onto the tongue. Do not let the dropper touch mouth of the infant
Disposal : Discard the used oral vaccine vial into the red bag
b) Preparing to vaccinate 
Use aseptic technique to prepare vaccines:
•	Start with handwashing – use soap and water and dry your hands thoroughly 
•	Work on a clean table 
•	Prepare vaccines individually for each child; NEVER  prefill syringes in anticipation of 
the next beneficiary
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

124c) Reconstitution of vaccines 
Vaccines that need to be mixed with diluent before use are BCG, MR and JE (Live 
attenuated) vaccine . Use these vaccines as per following instructions:
	Before reconstitution check that the vaccine is within the expiry date and that VVM has 
not reached/crossed the discard point
	When reconstituting, do so only with the diluent provided by manufacturer for that 
batch of vaccine
	Reconstitute the vaccine with entire amount of diluent immediately before use
	Reconstitute the vaccine even when only one eligible child is present
	Write the date and time of reconstitution  on the label of the vial immediately 
following reconstitution. Use the reconstituted vials only for a single session; do not 
carry them for another session 
	If any AEFI occurs following use of any vial, do not use that vial; mark it and retain 
safely for AEFI investigation
Steps for reconstitution
	Check for VVM on the vial. The VVM indicates whether the vaccine is usable or not. 
Once reconstituted, VVM is of no use, as these vaccines has to be used within 4 hours of 
reconstitution
	Double check each vial/ampoule for the expiry date and ensure that it is used within 
expiry date
	Open the vaccine vial. For a metal cap, use a vial opener to lift the pre-cut centre and bend 
it back; for a plastic cap, flip it off with your thumb or slowly twist it depending on the 
specific instructions for the type of vial
	Open the glass ampoule (with diluent) by holding the ampoule between the thumb and 
middle finger and supporting the top with the index finger; scratch the ampoule neck with 
a file, then gently break off the top, taking care to avoid injury from the sharp glass (see 
Figure 8.5). If vaccinator gets injury, the ampoule should be discarded since the contents 
may have been contaminated. Cover the wound before opening a new ampoule
	Draw the entire diluent out with a new disposable reconstitution (mixing) syringe and 
needle
	Insert the needle of the reconstitution (mixing) syringe into the vaccine vial and empty all 
the diluent – depress the plunger slowly to avoid frothing inside the vaccine vial
	Remove the reconstitution needle and cut the mixing syringe at the hub with a hub-cutter
	To mix the diluent and vaccine, shake the vial gently by holding at the neck . Take care 
not to touch the rubber septum or rub the vial between palms for mixing
	Write the date and time of reconstitution on the vial label
	Put the reconstituted vaccine vial on the ice pack of your vaccine carrier
	Use the reconstituted vaccine, within four hours of reconstitution. At the end of four 
hours, Discard the vaccine vial. DO NOT USE the vaccine. Do not carry them for another 
session. Reconstitute a new one if needed
 
Never touch the needle of the syringe. Ensure that the needle should not touch any part of 
finger of the vaccinator during the entire process of vaccination.CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

125Fig. 8.5: Procedure of reconstitution
d) Positioning the child for vaccination
The aim of positioning is to keep the child still and the caregiver and vaccinator 
comfortable. The choice of position will depend on the number of vaccines to be given, 
the age of the child and the materials available. Explain to the caregiver how to hold the 
child and that it is important to keep the child steady in order to reduce any pain.
Table 8.1 Different positions for vaccinating  
Position Illustration Directions for caregiver
Cuddle position:
Semi-recumbent on 
caregiver’s lap
1. Sit on a chair holding the infant 
sideways on lap with one arm 
behind infant’s back.
2. Tuck the infant’s inside arm 
around their own back to hug 
the shoulders and upper body 
close to their body.
3. Bring their arm around the 
infant’s back to hug the 
shoulders and upper body 
close to their body.
4. Tuck the infant’s legs between 
their own to hold them with 
their other arm.
5. Vaccinators should position 
themselves to avoid strain 
while giving vaccines at the 
correct angle.
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

126Bed position:
Lying on back on flat 
surface
1. Lay the infant, with both legs 
bare on a flat surface.
2. Stand on the other side of the 
bed and hold the infant’s hands 
and arms.
3. Vaccinator should stand at 
the infant’s feet and use non-
injecting hand to gently cup the 
slightly bent knee of the leg to 
receive the vaccine.
Upright position:
Sitting upright on 
the caregiver’s 
lap, facing straight 
outwards
1. Sit on a chair holding the infant 
sitting facing straight outwards 
on their lap.
2. Rest the infant’s back against 
their chest.
3. Encircle (hug) the infant’s upper 
body and arms with one arm 
and use the other arm to hold 
the infant’s lower legs (lower 
legs and feet on behind the 
other between the caregiver’s 
knees.
4. Vaccinator should stand on the 
side of the first injection and at 
the level where it can be given 
at 90 degree angle.
Straddle position:
Child>12 months 
of age vaccinated 
sitting upright on 
caregiver’s lap, 
facing towards them 
with straddling over 
theirs
1. Sit on a chair holding the child 
facing them and sitting astride 
their knees.
2. Encircle (hug) the child’s upper 
body and arms with their arms.
3. If necessary, use one arm to 
secure the child’s leg.
4. Vaccinator should stand on the 
side of the injection.
Independent 
position:
Adolescent/adult 
vaccinated sitting on 
a chair
Adolescent/adult vaccinated 
sitting on a chair  CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

127e) Good injection technique 
Good injection technique includes administering all injectable vaccines with an auto- 
disable (AD) syringe. To use AD syringes correctly, remember that the plunger of an 
AD syringe can only go back and forth once; so do not draw up air to inject into the 
vaccine vial when filling the AD syringe. 
Summary of injection steps 
•	Wash skin that looks dirty with 
water. Swabbing clean skin is not 
necessary. Do not use alcohol 
to clean the skin before giving 
vaccinations
•	Hold the syringe barrel between the 
thumb, index and middle fingers. 
Do not touch the needle
•	For intradermal (ID) injections, 
gently stretch and support the skin 
with the thumb and forefinger. Lay 
the syringe and needle almost flat 
along the infant’s skin. Gently insert the needle into the top layer of the skin (see Fig. 8.7)
•	For subcutaneous injections (SC), gently squeeze the skin. Insert the entire needle at a 
45-degree angle (towards the shoulder) with a quick, smooth action (see Fig. 8.8)
•	For intramuscular injections (IM), gently stretch and support the skin between thumb and 
forefinger. Push the entire needle in at a 90-degree angle with a quick, smooth action 
•	For all injections, depress the plunger slowly and smoothly, taking care not to move the 
syringe around
•	For all injections, pull the needle out quickly and smoothly at the same angle that it went 
in
•	For all injections, the caregiver may hold a clean swab gently over the site if it bleeds after 
injection
•	For all injections, cut the hub of the syringe with hub cutter and put the plastic part of the 
syringe into the red bag immediately after each vaccination
•	For all injections, soothe and distract the child when all the vaccines have been given
f) Intradermal (ID) injection 
BCG and IPV are injected intradermally (into the layers of the skin) for slow absorption. 
BCG - left upper arm and IPV - right upper arm (1st and 2nd dose) & left upper arm (3rd dose). 
To measure and inject the very small dose 
(0.05ml/ 0.1 ml) accurately, a special syringe 
and needle are used.
How to give BCG/IPV intradermally
1. Position:  Cuddle position on caregiver’s lap                                  
2. Administration technique: 
 Gently stretch and support the skin with the 
thumb and forefinger. Lay the syringe and needle 
almost flat along the infant’s skin. Gently insert 
the needle into the top layer of the skin. 
Fig. 8.6 Needle positions for ID, SC and IM 
injections
Fig.8.7. Administration of intra-
dermal injection
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

128•	Hold the syringe barrel with the bevel (hole) of the 
needle facing upwards
Place the syringe and needle almost flat (10 to 15 
degrees) along the infant’s skin.
•	Place your other thumb on the lower end of the 
syringe near the needle to hold the needle in position, but do 
not touch the needle
•	Insert the tip of the needle under the surface of the skin just 
past the bevel
•	Hold the plunger end of the syringe between the index and 
middle fingers. Press the plunger with the thumb
•	Push the plunger slowly; there will be some resistance while the 
bleb forms. If you feel no resistance to the plunger, you are not 
in the right place and should reposition
•	A pale flat-topped swelling with small pits like an orange peel 
should appear on the skin
•	After administration do not rub the area or allow the caregiver 
to rub the area
•	Remove the needle smoothly at the same angle as it went in
•	The caregiver may hold a clean swab gently over the site if it is bleeding. Do not rub or 
massage the area
•	Care to be taken to avoid child from rubbing the area after the injection is given. 
•	Soothe the infant
If the vaccine is administered incorrectly, the risk of side effects, such as abscesses or 
enlarged glands is greater specially for BCG vaccine, so the technique is very important. 
It is better to ask for help from a supervisor or other colleague than to continue giving 
intradermal injections incorrectly.
3. Disposal:  Cut the hub of the syringe with hub cutter and put the plastic part of the syringe 
into the red bag immediately after each vaccination. 
 
Fig. 8.8 Subcutaneous injectionCONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

129g) Subcutaneous (SC) injection in the upper arm 
The injection is given into the layer below the skin. Right arm is used for MR vaccine and 
left arm is used for JE Live attenuated vaccine.  
How to give a subcutaneous injection 
1. Position: The position depends on the age of the child, the number of vaccinations to be 
given and what is easiest and most convenient for the vaccinator. 
2. Administration: 
•	Hold the syringe barrel with fingers and thumb on the sides of the barrel and with the 
bevel (hole) of the needle facing upwards
•	Quickly push the needle into pinched-up skin; the needle should point towards the 
shoulder at a 45-degree angle. (See fig. 8.8) 
•	Depress the plunger smoothly, taking care not to move the needle under the skin. 
•	Pull the needle out quickly and smoothly at the same angle as it went in
•	The caregiver may hold a clean swab gently over the site if it is bleeding. Do not rub or 
massage the area
•	Soothe and distract the infant
3. Disposal:  Cut the hub of the syringe with hub cutter and put the plastic part of the syringe 
into the red bag immediately after each vaccination.
h) Intramuscular (IM) injection in infants 
The muscle on the Anterolateral aspect of Mid-Thigh (upper outer part of the thigh) is 
large and safe for intramuscular injections. (See Fig. 8.9)
In children aged less than 5 years the deltoid muscle of the upper arm is not safe to use 
since it is not developed enough to absorb the vaccine and the radial nerve is close to the 
surface. The deltoid muscle may be used in older children, adolescents and adults. 
 
Fig. no. 8.10: Showing 90º 
placement of needleFig. no. 8.9: Showing appropriate site (x mark) 
for IM Injection in infants
Intramuscular 
injection site
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

130Fig. no. 8.11: Showing site for IM Injection in older children
Intramuscular
injection site
How to give an intramuscular injection to an infant 
1. Position:  The position depends on the age of the child, the number of vaccinations to be 
given and what is easiest and most convenient for the vaccinator. 
2. Administration: 
•	Hold the syringe barrel with fingers and thumb on the sides of the barrel and with the 
bevel (hole) of the needle facing upwards
•	Gently stretch and support the skin on the upper, outer thigh with the other hand and 
quickly push the needle at a 90-degree angle down through the skin into the muscle
•	Depress the plunger smoothly, taking care not to move the needle under the skin
•	Pull the needle out quickly and smoothly at the same angle as it went in
•	The caregiver may hold a clean swab gently over the site if it is bleeding. Do not rub or 
massage the area
•	Soothe and distract the infant
3. Disposal:  Cut the hub of the syringe with hub cutter and put the plastic part of the syringe 
into the red bag immediately after each vaccination.CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

131Advantages of multiple injections 
UIP schedule is designed to provide a child several vaccinations during the same visit as this 
offers three major advantages:
• Protecting children: Immunizing children as soon as possible provides protection during 
the vulnerable early months of their lives. Often, diseases are more severe in babies. 
• Fewer vaccination visits: Giving several vaccinations at the same time means parents and 
caregivers do not need to make as many vaccination visits. 
• Increasing efficiency: It means that you will be able to more efficiently provide and deliver 
other health services by reducing the time they need to spend providing vaccinations.
Two injections can be given at one site, three fingers apart.
This may be needed only in few drop out/late vaccination cases
V. Closing the session:
1. After immunization session is over 
Segregate the vaccine vials (used and unused) and keep these inside in separate 
properly sealed zipper pouch/bag in the vaccine carrier under the cold-chain and 
ensure carrier is picked up by the AVD mechanism to deliver at the designated vaccine/
cold storage point. Leave the site clean and tidy.
Specifically, after using an outreach site:
o Do not leave anything behind that might be a health threat to the community
o Clean and return tables, chairs and other equipment to their owners
o Thank the local people who have helped to organize the session and remind them 
of the date of the next session
2. At the vaccine storage/cold-chain point at the end of immunization day 
Cold-chain handler should ensure appropriate segregation of the vaccines as explained 
below:
Unopened vials: 
1. If VVM is intact and in usable stage, retain the vial in ILR as per guideline, and issue 
accordingly
2. If VVM is not in usable stage or there is partial/complete defacement of the label, 
retain the vial in a plastic box clearly marked “Not to be used”  in a separate Cold-
chain Equipment (+2° to +8° C). Such vial should be discarded after 48 hours.
Opened vials: 
1. Segregate the vials on which Open Vial Policy is not applicable such as BCG/MR/
RVV with VVM on the Cap/ stem, JE (live) vaccine to retain in a plastic box clearly 
marked “Not to be used” in a separate Cold-chain Equipment (+2° to +8° C). These 
vials should be discarded after 48 hours. In case of any reported AEFI they will not 
be discarded but retain in proper cold-chain for investigation. 
2. Segregate the vials for which Open Vial Policy is applicable such as OPV/Td/DPT/
Hepatitis-B/Pentavalent/IPV/PCV/JE(Killed)/RVV with VVM on Label as below: 
a. If VVM is intact and is in usable stage, expiry date not passed and the written 
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

132date & time of vial opening is readable then retain the vaccine vial in ILR as 
per guideline subjected to condition that vial is within 28 days of opening 
and reissue in the next session after ensuring that it has not passed 28 days of 
opening the vial. 
b. If VVM is intact and is in usable stage, expiry date not passed and the written date 
& time of vial opening is readable but the vaccine vial has crossed 28 days of 
opening. These vials should be discarded after ascertaining that these vials are 
not required for AEFI investigation. 
c. If VVM is not in usable stage or there is partial/complete defacement of the label, 
retain in a plastic box clearly marked “Not to be used” in a separate Cold-chain 
Equipment (+20 to +80C). These vaccine vials should be discarded after 48 hours 
or before the next session whichever is earlier. 
3. If there is any vial which has been used and there is report of AEFI, that vial (even 
if it is in usable stage) has to be kept separately in proper cold-chain and properly 
sealed zipper bag earmarked “For AEFI Investigation”  in a separate Cold-chain 
Equipment (+20 to +80C) under special custody and in the knowledge of Medical 
Officer. This vial should never be issued to anyone unless authorized by DIO. 
The Cold-chain handler should document the return of used (complete/partial) and unused 
vials in the vaccine distribution register.
Wipe the carrier with a damp cloth and check it for cracks. Repair any cracks with adhesive 
tape and leave the carrier open to dry.
Recording data 
Accurate and reliable records are vital, not only for the individual child but also to track the 
immunization status through monthly and annual reporting.
During a session, individual immunization cards and health centre records – such as registers, 
counter foils and tally sheets – have to be completed. It is to be ensured that all data for the 
immunization done on the day are entered in U-WIN at the time of same session.
Analyze the session due list and tally sheet 
After every RI session:
•	Enlist all beneficiaries who did not turn up for vaccination for any reason. 
•	After listing such names, enter the names of beneficiaries who will be due for any vaccine 
in the next session
•	Share this list with the ASHA/AWW/LW so as to give them sufficient time to visit these 
houses and mobilize the beneficiaries for vaccination
•	The reasons for not turning up for vaccination, must be addressed by the team. Seek 
support from local influencers/key persons to identify any children or beneficiaries before 
leaving the session site
•	Remind the ASHA/AWW/LW on the next session date before leaving the session site
8.2. Using the immunization session checklist
Immunization session checklist (Table 8.2) can help ensure safety before, during and after 
immunization. This checklist is a reminder of key points in preparation, vaccination and CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

133closure of sessions that are described above, and is meant to reinforce positive actions. 
A printed copy of this checklist can be posted on a wall in the immunization area for easy 
viewing throughout sessions. 
Table 8.2. Immunization session checklist 
Before the Immunization 
sessionDuring the immunization 
sessionAfter the Immunization 
session
DID YOU:
1. CHECK if sufficient quantities 
of vaccines and diluents are 
available for the session? Y/N
2. CHECK vials for the following and 
take appropriate action:
• Expiry dates? Y/N
• Open vial date/time? Y/N
• VVM status? Y/N
• Freezing status? Y/N
3. PLACE vials in the appropriate 
place in the immunization area? 
Y/N
4. ENSURE sufficient supplies are 
available for the session including:
• Auto-disable (AD) syringes? Y/N
• Reconstitution syringes? Y/N
• Hub cutter? Y/N
• Black, red and blue bags? Y/N
• Immunization register? Y/N
• Immunization tally sheets? Y/N
• Blank immunization cards? Y/N
5. WASH your hands with soap? Y/NDID YOU:
1. GREET the beneficiary and 
caregiver? Y/N
2. REVIEW the beneficiary’s 
immunization card? Y/N
3. DETERMINE eligible 
vaccinations based on 
the national schedule, 
beneficiary’s age and possible 
contraindications? Y/N
4. RECONSTITUTE each vaccine 
with its matched diluent (for 
lyophilized vaccines)? Y/N
5. FILL syringes just before 
administration using aseptic 
technique? Y/N
6. ADMINISTER each vaccine 
according to recommended 
technique and correct injection 
site? Y/N
7. IMMEDIATELY cut syringes with 
hub cutter after each injection? 
Y/N
8. RECORD all vaccinations 
in register, tally sheet and 
immunization card? Y/N
9. COMMUNICATE key messages, 
including potential AEFls and 
date of next visit? Y/N
10. Did the U-WIN data entry for all 
those were vaccinated? Y/NDID YOU:
1. CORRECTLY ASSESS if open 
vials can be used in the next 
session in accordance with 
open vial policy? Y/N
2. DISCARD open vials that 
should not be used? Y/N
3. RECORD date and time of 
opening on vials that can be 
Used and PLACE them in the 
use first” box in the ILR? Y/N
4. RETURN unopened vials to 
the cold-chain point ? Y/N
5. COMPLETE Session due-list 
cum Tally sheet? Y/N
6. LIST the names of children 
who missed vaccination and 
require follow up? Y/N
7. HANDLE immunization 
waste correctly? Y/N
8. TAKE appropriate action to 
ensure sufficient vaccine 
stock for the next session? 
Y/N
9. INFORM COMMUNITY of date 
and time of next session? Y/N
8.3.  Birth dose vaccination protocol22
Birth dose vaccination of the child is an integral component of Universal Immunization 
Programme (UIP) and is provided against three vaccine preventable diseases (hepatitis B, 
poliomyelitis and severe form of childhood tuberculosis).
These vaccinations should be provided SOON after child’s birth and certainly before the 
mother is discharged from the health facility. Particular care has to be taken for the hepatitis 
В vaccination which needs to be administered AS SOON AS POSSIBLE  and certainly within 
24 hours of birth to prevent transmission of infection from mother to infants. The risk 
of acquiring hepatitis В infection for a neonate can be as high as 85-90%, if the mother is 
hepatitis В positive.
CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

134The following protocol for administering birth dose vaccination is to be followed-
1. Hepatitis B, BCG including diluent and Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) should be stored in a 
vaccine carrier with four conditioned ice packs (if it’s a cold-chain point)
2. Birth dose vaccines should preferably be available in post-partum area where the 
mothers with babies are shifted immediately after delivery. Immunization session/ 
administration of the Birth dose is to be organized in that area.
3. Designated staff nurses/ANMs posted in the labour room should be responsible for the 
administration of the birth dose vaccination to the newborn. They should be trained/
oriented for the same.
4. Hepatitis В and OPV vaccine should be opened even if there is a single newborn for 
vaccination and open vial policy should be followed. The open vial policy guidelines are 
attached as annexure for ready reference.
5. Hepatitis В and OPV birth dose should be given to all the newborns immediately after 
birth and definitely within 24 hours of birth.
6. BCG needs to be reconstituted before administration of the vaccine to the newborn 
and to be used within four hours after reconstitution. Efforts should be made that every 
newborn should be vaccinated before discharge with BCG. Therefore, a new vial of BCG 
vaccine should be opened and reconstituted if need be, thereby ensuring availability of 
BCG vaccine at all times. If the newborn misses the birth dose for some totally unavoidable 
reasons, the dose of BCG to be administered at the next earliest opportunity or next 
vaccination i.e. at 1.5 months/6 weeks when the infant is due for Pentavalent 1/OPV 1 
vaccination.
7. Date and time to be recorded for all the open vials.
8. Hepatitis В should be administered intramuscular in the anterolateral aspect of the left  
thigh, while vitamin К should be administered intramuscular on the anterolateral aspect 
of the right thigh at the same time.
9. The birth dose of vaccines should be recorded both on MCP card/baby case sheet as well 
as the discharge slip, while the Vitamin К administration to be recorded on the discharge 
slip.
10. In case mother is discharged before 24 hours, ensure that infant has received all three-
birth dose vaccination.
11. If the child after delivery is shifted to NICU, the birth doses should be given in consultation 
with pediatrician /neonatologist.
12. If the institutions are also getting newborns delivered outside the institution who have 
not been immunized with birth doses, the same should be given as early as possible.
13. At the time of discharge advice should be given to parent to bring the child for next doses 
of vaccination at 1.5 month/6 week of age of the child.
14. Ensure availability of all logistics like vaccines, diluents, syringes, hub cutter, etc.
15. Regular supervision and monitoring of the above processes to be ensured.CONDUCTING THE ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION SESSION

135Adverse Events Following 
Immunization (AEFI)Unit 9

136Key contents Page
9.1. Adverse events following Immunization (AEFIs) 137
9.2. Types of AEFIs 137
9.3. Reporting of AEFIs 142
9.4. Managing AEFIs 143
9.5. Use of syrup Paracetamol following vaccinations 145
9.6. First line Management of Anaphylaxis in Field Settings 146
9.7. Role of ANM/ vaccinator in initial management of anaphylaxis 146
9.8. Responsibilities of health service  providers in AEFI surveillance 152Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, health worker should be able: 
• To list and identify adverse events following immunization
• To manage adverse events (fever, local reactions, suspected 
anaphylaxis at the session site)
• To explain the steps in recording and reporting adverse events 
following immunization
• To list the responsibilities of health service providers in minimizing 
AEFIs

1379.1. Adverse events following immunization1, 23, 24, 25
Adverse event following immunization (AEFI) is defined as any untoward medical occurrence 
which follows immunization, and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with 
the usage of the vaccine.
The adverse event may be any unfavorable or unintended sign, symptom or disease. Reported 
adverse events can either be truly associated with vaccine or result of immunization process; 
or coincidental events that are not due to the vaccine or immunization process but are 
temporally associated with immunization.
AEFIs may not necessarily be causally related to vaccine/vaccination. Therefore, adverse 
events generating parental, community or media concerns should also be reported as AEFIs. 
9.2. Types of AEFIs:
Based specifically on the severity, cause and frequency, vaccine reactions or AEFIs may be 
broadly grouped as under: 
I. AEFIs by severity of the event: 
a) Minor reactions (common) 
b) Severe vaccine reactions (uncommon)
c) Serious vaccine reactions (rare)
II.  Cause-specific AEFIs: 
a) Vaccine product-related reactions 
b) Vaccine quality defect-related reactions 
c) Immunization error-related reactions 
d) Immunization-triggered stress response (ITSR)
e) Coincidental events
I. AEFIs by severity of the event: 
For the purpose of reporting, AEFIs can be minor, severe and serious. Most vaccine reactions 
are minor and settle on their own. Severe and serious reactions are rare.
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)Adverse Events Following 
Immunization (AEFI)

138Minor vaccine reactions: 
A vaccine induces immunity by causing the recipient’s immune system to react to the 
vaccine. Therefore, local reaction, fever and systemic symptoms can result as part of the 
immune response. In addition, some of the vaccine’s components (e.g. aluminium adjuvant, 
stabilizers or preservatives) can lead to reactions.
Local reactions (pain, swelling and/or redness at the injection site) and fever can be expected 
in about 10% of vaccinees, except for those injected with DPT, or tetanus-adult diphtheria 
(Td) boosters, where up to 50% can be affected. BCG causes a specific local reaction that 
starts as a papule (lump) two or more weeks after immunization, which becomes ulcerated 
and heals after several months, leaving a scar. Measles/MR vaccine causes fever, rash and/or 
conjunctivitis, and affects 5–15% of recipients.
Serious and severe vaccine reactions: 
Serious AEFI: An AEFI will be considered serious if it results in death, requires hospitalization, 
results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or congenital anomaly/birth defect 
or a cluster (two or more cases) of AEFIs occur in a geographical area or the AEFI evokes 
community concern.
SERIOUS AEFI 
• Death • Hospitalization • Clusters • Disability • Congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• Media reports/ community or parental concern
Severe AEFI: AEFIs that are clinically more severe than minor AEFIs but do not have 
characteristics of serious category (events resulting in death, inpatient hospitalization or 
disability) are reported as severe AEFIs. This category includes cases that are clinically severe, 
but do not need admission in hospital and/or are treated in OPD/daycare or could not be 
admitted due to any reason.ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI) 


139SEVERE AEFI 
• Can be disabling and, rarely, life threatening
• Most do not lead to long-term problems
• Must also be reported
• Examples: seizures, hypotonic hypo responsive episodes (HHE), prolonged crying, 
thrombocytopenia
Examples include non-hospitalized cases of seizures, hypotonic hyporesponsive episodes 
(HHEs), persistent screaming, anaphylaxis, severe local reaction, injection site abscesses, 
etc. Anaphylaxis, while potentially fatal, is treatable without leaving any long-term effects.
Fig. 9.1. Minor, serious and severe vaccine reactions: 
     Minor Reactions
•    Common and self limiting
•    Occurs within a few hours of
      vaccination
•    Resolves over a short period of time       Severe Reactions
•    Are clinically more severe than minor 
reactions, may or may not be life 
threatening
•    Most do not lead to long-term problems
•    Examples - high grade fever (102° F) treated 
without hospitalization, allergic reactions 
managed without admission on OPD basis
Serious reactions
Death
Inpatient hospitalization
Persistent or signi/f_icant 
disability
AEFI cluster
Congenital anomaly
Parental / community / 
media concern
II. Cause-specific AEFIs: 
Following is the cause-specific categorization of serious/severe AEFIs
Table 9.1. Cause-specific type of AEFI
Sl. No. Cause-specific type of AEFI Definition
1. Immunization error-related 
reaction An event that is caused by inappropriate vaccine 
handling, prescribing or administration and thus by 
its nature is preventable.
2. Vaccine product-related 
reactionVaccine product-related reaction is an event that 
is caused or precipitated by a vaccine due to one 
or more of the inherent properties of the vaccine 
product.
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

1403. Vaccine quality defect-
related reactionAn event that is caused or precipitated by a vaccine 
that is due to one or more quality defects of the 
vaccine product, including its administration device 
as provided by the manufacturer.
4. Immunization triggered 
stress response (earlier 
Immunization anxiety-
related reaction)An event arising from anxiety about the 
immunization.
5. Coincidental event An event that is caused by something other 
than the vaccine product, immunization error or 
immunization anxiety.
Reference: CIOMS/WHO 2018
Note:  “Immunization” as used in these definitions means the usage of a vaccine for the purpose 
of immunizing individuals. “Usage” includes all processes that occur after a vaccine product 
has left the manufacturing/ packaging site, i.e. handling, prescribing and administration of 
the vaccine.
Immunization error-related reactions
An adverse event can occur as a result of inappropriate handling/ prescribing/ administration 
of a vaccine. It is very important to prevent, identify and rectify these errors. (Table 9.2). 
Programme errors may impact the confidence vaccine beneficiaries have in vaccines in the 
area and will require special advocacy and communication activities to get the immunization 
programme back on track.
An immunization error-related reaction may lead to a cluster of events associated with 
immunization. These clusters are usually associated with a particular provider, health facility, 
or even a single vial of vaccine that has been inappropriately prepared or contaminated. 
Immunization error-related reactions can also affect many vials. For example, freezing 
vaccine during transport may lead to an increase in local reactions.
Table 9.2 : Immunization error-related reactions
Immunization
ErrorExamples Related reaction
Error in vaccine 
(and diluent) 
handlingExposure to excess heat or cold 
(using hard frozen ice packs in 
RI) as a result of inappropriate 
transport, storage or handling 
of the vaccine (and its diluent) 
where applicable.
Use of a product after the expiry 
date.Systemic or local reactions due to 
changes in the physical nature of 
the vaccine, such as agglutination  
of aluminium-based excipients in 
freeze-sensitive vaccines.
Besides AEFI, there is possibility of 
failure to vaccinate as a result of 
loss of potency or non-viability of 
an attenuated product.ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

141Error in vaccine 
prescribing or 
non-adherence to 
recommendations 
for useFailure to adhere to a
contraindication.
Failure to adhere to vaccine 
indications or prescription (dose 
or schedule).
Use of reconstituted vaccine 
beyond the recommended 
period.Anaphylaxis, disseminated 
infection with an attenuated live 
vaccine.
Systemic and/or local reactions, 
neurological, muscular, vascular 
or bony injury due to incorrect 
injection site, equipment or 
technique.
Contamination of the vaccine 
(usually with bacterium 
Staphylococcus aureus), leading 
to local tenderness and tissue 
infiltration, vomiting, diarrhea, 
cyanosis, high temperature, 
dehydration and death within a few 
hours after administration, if not 
managed in time.
Error in 
administrationUse of an incorrect diluent or 
injection of a product other than 
the intended vaccine.
Incorrect sterile technique or 
inappropriate procedure with a 
multidose vial.
Inadequate shaking of the 
vaccine before use, superficial 
injection and use of frozen 
vaccineReaction due to the inherent 
properties of whatever was 
administered other than the  
intended vaccine or diluent.
Infection at the site of injection 
/ beyond the site of injection, 
local reaction (e.g., suppuration, 
abscess), systemic effect (e.g., 
sepsis or toxic shock syndrome), or 
blood borne-virus infection (e.g., 
HIV, Hep B or Hep C).
Sterile abscesses and local 
reactions from aluminum 
containing vaccines.
With the introduction of AD syringes, infections due to non-sterile injections have reduced 
significantly.
Vaccine product-related reaction
This is a reaction (an individual body’s response) to the inherent properties of the administered 
vaccine, even when the vaccine has been prepared, handled and administered correctly. 
Examples of common minor reactions are fever, pain, etc. and severe/serious reactions are 
anaphylaxis, etc.
Vaccine quality defect-related reaction
This is a defect in a vaccine that occurred during the manufacturing process.
Immunization triggered stress response (earlier Immunization anxiety-related reaction)
It is a response to the stress some individuals may feel about getting an injection and 
encompasses a spectrum of manifestations ranging from a vasovagal reaction (fainting), 
hyperventilation to a dissociative neurological symptom reaction which includes non-
epileptic seizures (formerly known as a conversion reaction). Clinical presentations include 
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

142fainting, light-headedness, and dizziness, tingling around the mouth and in the hands. 
Younger children may react with vomiting, breath-holding, which, in some cases can lead to 
a brief period of unconsciousness and convulsions.
Immunization stress-related response are common in adults, adolescents and children over 
5 years of age, resulting from pain of injection and is unrelated to the content of the vaccine. 
These are common in mass vaccination campaigns.
To minimize this anxiety response, it is advisable that the beneficiaries and caregivers are 
explained about the vaccine and its process before vaccination. If possible, the vaccinator 
needs to segregate potential recipients from those who received the vaccine. For management 
of such events, please refer to the paragraph on managing AEFI.
Coincidental events
Coincidental event– this means that the event has occurred after immunization and is not 
caused due to the vaccine or process of administration. These events have only a temporal 
association, i.e., event happening after immunization, and are not causally related. Vaccines 
are normally scheduled early in life when infections and other illnesses are common, or when 
underlying congenital or neurological conditions are manifested. It is, therefore, possible to 
encounter many events, including deaths, which may be falsely attributed to vaccine through 
chance association. Immediate investigation as a response is critical to the community’s 
concern about vaccine safety and to maintain public confidence in immunization.
9.3. Reporting of AEFIs
If the health worker comes across an adverse event following vaccination, it should be 
reported. AEFI can be reported after any vaccine whether
o Given in UIP schedule or not
o Given in government or private setting
o Beneficiary is a child or adult
AEFI registers at PHCs, CHCs, etc.
•	All ANMs should notify all AEFIs (serious, severe and minor) of their respective areas 
immediately and document the details in an AEFI register (see Annexure D) to be  
maintained at all centers from PHC upward. Medical Officer In-charge of the center should 
analyze the information regularly to look for any pattern or preventable programme  
errors
•	A serious or severe AEFI case needs to be reported immediately to the concerned Medical 
Officer or to DIO
•	The medical officer will fill a hard copy of CRF, sign it and forward it to DIO, who will verify, 
countersign and upload the information and scanned copy of CRF in SAFE-VAC
Reporting of AEFIs in U-WIN: The vaccinators can report the AEFIs through U-WIN. The 
details about the reporting in U-WIN in mentioned in unit 13
Reporting in Health Management Information System (HMIS)
In the current HMIS system, there are formats for reporting of various data primarily related 
to RCH from facilities specifically sub-centers, PHCs/wellness centres, CHCs, sub-divisional 
hospitals, district hospitals and medical colleges. In case of sub-centres (HWC-Sub-centre), ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

143the number of AEFI cases reported during the month is recorded under section 8.6 Adverse 
Event Following Immunization (AEFI). There are four rows under this section as follows:
Fig. 9.2. HMIS Monthly service delivery reporting format
 
Please note that deaths (reported under 8.6.3a) will also be reported under 8.6.3.
ANMs should enter “0” in the relevant row in the formats, if no AEFI has been reported. The 
numbers need to be entered separately for “In facility” and “Outreach” as may be the case. 
9.4. Managing AEFIs
Health workers must have a humane, sensitive and empathetic approach in dealing with AEFI 
cases. Timely attention and management of AEFIs can prevent serious clinical consequences 
and helps in maintaining confidence of the caregiver.
At the session site
Health workers must be vigilant so that AEFIs can be prevented, detected timely and  
managed. 
Preparedness:  At the session site, health worker or vaccinator should follow the guidelines 
as mentioned below:
	Ensure recipients wait for 30 minutes at session site after vaccination and monitor the 
health condition of the recipient
	To reduce chances of occurrence of Immunization stress related responses, minimize 
overcrowding by proper planning of immunization sessions and reduce waiting time. 
Prepare vaccines out of recipient’s view, ensure privacy during the procedure and keep 
the beneficiaries engaged during the observation period
	After vaccination, inform the vaccine recipient
 i. About any minor events which may occur
 ii. Adverse events such as mild to moderate fever, local pain and swelling at injection 
site, malaise, etc.:
a. Syrup Paracetamol-125mg/5ml (for infants and children) or tablet Paracetamol 
(for adults) SOS with a minimum interval of 4-6 hours between two doses
b. Ask the beneficiary to visit the nearest health facility, if minor adverse events 
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

144persist beyond 2-3 days 
 iii. In case of adverse event/discomfort/illness, other than minor events, the beneficiary 
should visit the nearest health facility 
	Anaphylaxis kit with inj. adrenaline within expiry date must be available at outreach 
session site
	Inform Medical Officer immediately by telephone about serious/severe AEFIs
	Emergency numbers (102, 108, etc.) for transporting case to AEFI management center / 
higher health facility with vaccinator team
 
The differences in anaphylaxis kit and AEFI kit are mentioned in table 6.12 below.
Table 9.2: Difference between AEFI kit and Anaphylaxis kit
Anaphylaxis kit AEFI kit
At immunization session site At health facility well equipped to manage 
anaphylaxis (PHC/CHC/district hospital, etc.)
For use by ANM/ Health worker/vaccinator For use by medical officer
Contains adrenaline, tuberculin/insulin 
syringes, 24/25 G one-inch needles, swabs, 
guidelines/job aid with dose calculationIn addition to contents of the Anaphylaxis 
kit, contains intubation and resuscitation 
equipment, hydrocortisone (injection and 
tablet), ringer lactate, normal saline, 5 % 
dextrose, IV drip set, scalp vein sets.
Managing AEFI when it occurs
When a serious or severe adverse event occurs, you should immediately:
o Provide immediate first aid: lay child flat; ensure airway is clear. If child is unconscious, 
put in semi-prone position
o Refer to the MO (PHC) or nearest AEFI management centre for prompt treatment. 
Accompany the patient if needed
o Inform the MO (PHC) at the health centre immediately by the fastest means possible e.g. 
telephonically
o Report and assist in investigation of AEFIs
 
 
Fig. 9.3: Contents of Anaphylaxis kit Fig. 9.4 Contents of an AEFI treatment kitADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

145Treat minor/non-serious AEFIs symptomatically as per Table below:
Table no 9.4.  Minor reactions due to vaccines
Minor vaccine reactions Treatment When to report
Local reaction (pain, 
swelling, redness)• Cold cloth at injection site
• Give Paracetamol• In case of an abscess
Fever > 38.5°C • Give extra fluids
• Give tepid sponging
• Give Paracetamol• When accompanied by
 other symptoms
Irritability, malaise and 
systemic symptoms• Give extra fluids
• Give Paracetamol• When severe or unusual
9.5. Use of syrup Paracetamol following vaccinations24
Some common minor adverse events following immunization are local reactions, pain 
at injection site and fever. High-grade fever following vaccination may precipitate febrile 
seizure in susceptible infants. The ANM should give age-appropriate dose to all children who 
have got Pentavalent vaccine or DPT with an instruction to give Paracetamol in case of fever 
or pain in injection site. The recommended dose of Paracetamol is 10-15mg/kg body weight 
every 4-6 hours with a maximum dose of four doses in 24 hours. The recommended doses 
and frequency of administration of Paracetamol syrup (125 mg/5 ml) as per age is as follows:
Table 9.5: Age wise dose of Paracetamol syrup (125 mg/5 ml) in infants
Age group Dose How often (in 24 hours)
6 weeks-6 months 2.5 ml
SOS or 4-6 hourly following vac -
cination#6-24 months 5 ml
2-4 years 7.5 ml
4-6 years 10 ml
* Paracetamol is not recommended in children weighing <2 kg.
# Maximum four doses in 24 hours with a gap of at least four hours between two doses.
Note:
1. Dispense one bottle of 60 ml syrup Paracetamol 125 mg/5 ml after every dose of 
Pentavalent and DPT.
2. Use the dosage chart to choose volume of single dose of Paracetamol required to be 
given as per age group.
3. Show the mark on the cap till which the syrup has to be filled to the caregiver and instruct 
to:
•	Administer age-appropriate dose of syrup Paracetamol ONLY WHEN THERE IS FEVER.
•	Not administer more than four doses a day
•	USE only the cap supplied with the Paracetamol syrup bottle to measure and 
administer syrup Paracetamol to the child
•	Shake the bottle for 10 seconds before use if suspension is supplied in place of syrup.
•	Refer the child to a doctor if the fever is >38° C (100.4° Fahrenheit)
Caregivers should be informed and encouraged to practice non-pharmacological methods 
like breastfeeding before, during and after immunization for relieving pain and crying. Other • When severe or unusual
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

146methods like sponging, skin to skin contact and keeping with mother are also helpful in 
reducing pain, fever and crying after immunization. A feverish child can be cooled with a 
tepid sponge or bath, and by wearing cool clothing. Extra fluids need to be given to feverish 
children. For a local reaction, a cold cloth applied to the site may ease the pain.
Refer the child to the hospital, if a child develops fever indicated by;
•	An axillary temperature of 38°C or 100.4°Fahrenheit or higher 
•	Or feels hot to touch
For more information, please refer to “Guidelines on use of syrup Paracetamol following 
vaccinations” by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt of India.
9.6. First line Management of Anaphylaxis in Field Settings
Anaphylaxis and its manifestation: 
Anaphylaxis is a very rare but severe and potentially fatal allergic reaction.
The whole body is affected, often within minutes of exposure to the allergen (substance 
causing the allergic reaction), but sometimes after hours. It occurs because the immune 
system overreacts to an allergen and causes secretion of chemical substances that cause 
swelling of blood vessels. Common allergens include foods such as peanuts, dairy products, 
eggs, etc. and non-foods such as wasp or bee sting, medications, vaccines, latex, etc. The 
symptoms of an anaphylactic reaction include generalized flushing of the skin, nettle rash 
(hives) anywhere on the body, swelling of throat and mouth, difficulty in swallowing or 
speaking, alterations in heart rate, severe asthma, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, 
sudden feeling of weakness (drop in blood pressure), collapse and unconsciousness.
Recognition of anaphylaxis
In anaphylaxis, there is sudden onset of symptoms which rapidly worsens. Individual may 
complain of difficulty in breathing and/or giddiness/loss of consciousness, hypotension, 
skin changes such as generalized rashes, swelling of the lips and tongue (angioedema), hives 
(urticaria) and flushing. The person may have had a severe allergic reaction or anaphylaxis in 
the past. However, this may be the first time. Sudden onset and rapid progression of ≥ 1 signs 
and symptoms of any of the two systems (respiratory, cardiovascular and dermatological/ 
mucosal) should be suspected as a case of anaphylaxis.
9.7. Role of ANM/ vaccinator in initial management of anaphylaxis
ANMs are in continuous contact with the community and are responsible for delivery of 
multiple health services, including immunization, antenatal care, reproductive and child 
health. They are trained on safe injection practices. In order to initiate the process of timely 
management of anaphylaxis cases by ANMs, they need to be trained for:
1) Early recognition of a case of anaphylaxis
2) Immediate administration of a single age-appropriate dose of injection adrenaline 
intramuscularly. This injection is to be given using 1 ml syringe with 24/25 gauge 1 inch 
detachable needle.
3) Arranging immediate transportation of patient to the nearest health facility/ center (well 
equipped to manage anaphylaxis)ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

1474) Providing details of the patient to medical officer for follow up and proper documentation 
in records and reports
Fig. 9.5   Steps for Initial Management of Anaphylaxis
 
Steps to be taken by an ANM
a) Assess case and suspect anaphylaxis
b) Initial management of suspected anaphylaxis case with one time use of injection  
adrenaline
c) Transporting suspected anaphylaxis case to the nearest health facility
d) Inform medical officer and documentation
a) Assess case and suspect anaphylaxis
A case of anaphylaxis is suspected if the following criteria are met:
Usually respiratory, dermatological and cardiovascular systems are involved in anaphylaxis. 
The signs and symptoms under each of the three systems are listed in table below.
Table 9.6. Signs and symptoms of Anaphylaxis
System Signs and Symptoms
Respiratory • Swelling in tongue, lip, throat, uvula or larynx
• Difficulty in breathing
• Stridor (Harsh vibrating sounds during breathing)
• Wheezing (breath with whistling or rattling sound in the chest)
• Cyanosis (bluish discoloration of arms and legs, tongue, ears, lips, 
etc.)
• Grunting (noisy breathing)
Cardiovascular • Decreased level /loss of consciousness (fainting, dizziness)
• Low blood pressure (measured hypotension)
• Tachycardia (increased heart rate, palpitation)
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

148Dermatological 
or mucosal • Generalized urticaria (raised red skin lesion, rash with itching)
• Generalized erythema (redness of skin) 
• Local or generalized angioedema- itchy/ painful swelling of 
subcutaneous tissues such as upper eyelids, lips, tongue, face, etc.
• Generalized pruritus (itching) with skin rash 
*Modified from The Brighton Collaboration Anaphylaxis Working Group; Anaphylaxis: Case Definition and Guidelines 
for data collection, analysis, and presentation of immunization safety data; Vaccine; Vol. 25, (2007); 5675-5684
In most cases of anaphylaxis, skin and mucous membrane are affected. In addition to the 
signs and symptoms given above, following features may also be observed: anxiety, diarrhea, 
abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting and sneezing or rhinorrhea.
Fig.9.6 Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis – Cyanosis, Angioedema & Urticaria
 ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)Cyanosis
UrticariaAngioedema

149Fig.9.7 Signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis
 
b) Initial management of suspected anaphylaxis case
Following vaccination, a case of anaphylaxis can be suspected if there is early onset of 
symptoms (within minutes to 6 hours) with rapid progression. In such a case,
o The ANM should reassure the patient, parents and relatives
o The suspected case should never be left alone
o If the patient is conscious, he/she should be kept in a supine position with lower limbs 
raised higher than head level
o If the patient is unconscious, he/she should be kept in left lateral position
o As per the age of patient (see table 9.7) , ANM must administer one dose of injection 
adrenaline by deep intramuscular route
o ANM should seek help to immediately arrange for an ambulance/vehicle to transport the 
patient to the nearest health facility (PHC/CHC/District Hospital/Civil Hospital)
Steps for administration of injection adrenaline by ANM
o Take one ampoule of adrenaline (1:1000 dilution) solution from Anaphylaxis Kit (Fig. 9.3) 
and check name, dilution and expiry date on label of vial (not from kit label). Remember 
that adrenaline ampoules are also labelled as epinephrine. Epinephrine is another name 
for adrenaline
o Take a 1 ml tuberculin syringe or a 40-unit insulin syringe and a 24/25 G one-inch-long 
needle
o Using the “age specific dosing chart” available in the anaphylaxis kit, load the syringe 
with the appropriate dose of adrenaline. [Table 9.7]
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

150o Use swab to clean the middle 1/3rd of anterolateral aspect of the thigh of the opposite 
limb to that in which vaccine was given
o Give deep intramuscular injection at 90° angle to skin in middle 1/3rd of anterolateral 
aspect of thigh
Fig.9.8 Administration of intramuscular injection
 
Table 9.7.   Chart listing age-specific dose of adrenaline (1:1000) to be administered
intramuscularly using tuberculin / insulin syringes 
Age group Dose in mL (tuberculin syringe)# Equivalent volume in insulin syringe#
0-1 ·year 0.05 2
1-6 years 0.1 4
6-12 years 0.2 8
12-18 years 0.3 12
Adults 0.5 20
# Based on type of syringe available (tuberculin 1mL/insulin), choose relevant volume of 
adrenaline for administration
Anaphylaxis kit for ANM
In order to ensure availability of adrenaline and the required syringes and needles for 
administration at the session site, an anaphylaxis kit should be available with the ANM at 
every session. The contents of the anaphylaxis kit is mentioned in Fig. 9.3.
The anaphylaxis kit may have either tuberculin syringe or insulin syringe (without fixed 
needles) . Usually, insulin syringes are more easily available as compared to tuberculin 
syringes. The needle to be used should be of 24G or 25G with length of one inch for IM 
administration. Based on the availability of tuberculin or insulin syringe and considering ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

151the age of the patient, the appropriate dose of adrenaline should be loaded in the syringe. 
A comparison of the markings on tuberculin (in mL) and insulin (in units) syringes for 
corresponding volumes is shown in figure below.
 
 
The following details of the patient should be conveyed  to the medical officer of the health 
facility well equipped to manage anaphylaxis: Name, age, date,  time, site, route and dose 
of adrenaline administered. The same should be available as a record with the ANM after 
transferring the patient.
c) Transporting suspected anaphylaxis case to the nearest health facility
As soon as the ANM suspects anaphylaxis, she should administer injection adrenaline 
intramuscular and call for the ambulance. The ANM should ensure that the patient is 
transferred to the ambulance/ vehicle without delay and refer the case to nearest health 
facility well equipped to manage anaphylaxis for further management.
o The ANM should keep contact details of an alternate vehicle owner/driver always. If an 
ambulance is not available or it is delayed, the ANM should contact the owner/driver of 
the alternate vehicle to transport the case to nearest health facility equipped to manage 
anaphylaxis
o The untied sub centre funds may be used to reimburse cost of transportation
d) Informing the medical officer and documentation
o As the child is being transferred, the ANM will inform the medical officer about the case  
with necessary details (name, age, date, time, site, route and dose of adrenaline 
administered) for further management at the health facility well equipped to manage 
anaphylaxis and for follow up
o The anaphylaxis reaction (suspected or confirmed) should be recorded in the  
immunization card in block letters and further vaccinations should be given only as 
per prescription of a medical officer in hospital settings with availability of adrenaline  
and other resuscitation equipment
o The case details should also be recorded in the AEFI register and reported as a serious/
severe AEFI case by the MO in the CRF to the DIO
Fig. 9.9. Tuberculin (in mL) and Insulin (in 
units) syringes with detachable needlesFig. 9.10      Markings of age-appropriate 
dosage of adrenaline in mL (tuberculin 
syringes) and in units insulin syringes
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

152ANM/ staff nurses must ensure 30 minutes post vaccination observation for each beneficiary 
and identify suspected case of anaphylaxis and administer one dose of Intramuscular 
injection Adrenaline (age-appropriate dose) to these suspected cases at RI session site 
before referring to the AEFI management center.
Not administering adrenaline can be fatal for the beneficiary suffering from anaphylaxis. One 
dose of IM injection adrenaline is safe.
9.8. Responsibilities of healthcare service providers in AEFI surveillance
Community level 
Anganwadi and ASHA/volunteers/frontline workers 
o Regular follow up with beneficiaries to identify AEFIs after the vaccination session, using 
the beneficiaries’ list provided by the ANM. 
o Inform the adverse event immediately by telephone to concerned ANM, MO, etc. 
o Assist in referral of any suspected cases 
o Assist the team investigating the event 
o Support in building community confidence
Sub Centre level 
ANM and CHO
•	Follow best immunization practices. Prior to starting vaccination at the RI site, the ANM 
must note down the following particulars:
o manufacturer’s name
o expiry date
o batch number
o VVM status (for new and partially used vaccines)
o Date on the label of partially used vaccine (in case of OVP)
o In case of reconstituted vaccines, date and time of opening on the label
•	Ensure that the vaccines and diluents are supplied by the same vaccine manufacturer
•	Ensure that vaccine vial septum has not been submerged in water or contaminated in any 
way
•	Ensure an anaphylaxis kit with adrenaline within expiry date is available at the session 
site
•	Ensure four key messages are delivered after vaccination
•	Provide a list of children vaccinated during the session to the AWW/ASHA and request 
them to be alert and report AEFIs (if any) to her and the concerned MO
•	Ensure reasons for dropouts are entered in the immunization card counterfoils
•	Treat minor/non-serious AEFIs (mild symptoms like fever, pain, etc.) symptomatically
•	For all other cases (serious/severe) provide immediate first aid and refer the case to 
MO(PHC) or to the appropriate health facility for prompt treatment and report. Inform 
the MO(PHC) at the health center immediately by the fastest means possible
•	Share details of all AEFIs (serious/severe and minor) with the MOIC in the weekly block 
level meeting. Ensure details of all serious/severe and minor cases are entered in the AEFI 
case register maintained at the block PHC (see Annexure 6.2 for suggested format for 
AEFI Case Register)ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

153•	Assist in investigation of AEFIs and take corrective action in response to the guidance 
from the MO (PHC)
Health supervisors (HSs) 
o Supervise and provide hands-on training to the ANMs/vaccinators in the field. This 
includes provision of information on referral transport and concerned officials in case of 
crisis
o Monitor the community for adverse events during supervisory visits to immunization sites 
or sub centres. Also monitor and ensure follow-up of beneficiaries by HWs. Ensure reasons 
for dropouts are entered in the counterfoils
o Encourage the HWs to report AEFIs. Serious/severe AEFIs should be notified immediately 
by the fastest means possible
o Analyze the reported AEFIs in the SC monthly reports and keep track of HWs who have not 
reported any AEFI over a period of time
o Assist the investigation team in conducting the investigation
ADVERSE EVENTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI)

154

155Records, reports and 
using data for actionUnit 10

156Key contents Page
10.1. Importance of record-keeping 157
10.2. Data tools for recording and reporting
•	Mother and Child Protection (MCP) card with counterfoil 
•	Tracking Bag
•	Immunization/RCH Registers 
•	Name based list of due beneficiaries and Tally Sheet 
•	U-WIN
•	Monthly Progress Report 
•	Coverage Monitoring Chart157Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, health worker should be able: 
• To list the records and reports to be maintained at the subcentre 
• To explain the correct use of the Mother and Child Protection (MCP) 
card 
• To demonstrate correct use of tracking bag to keep the counterfoils 
• To record the information accurately in the registers and reporting 
formats
• To use coverage monitoring chart to track the progress 

15710.1. Importance of Record-Keeping
Systematic and regular recording of the vaccinations given at each session ensures that the 
immunization services reach all beneficiaries, identifies dropouts and leftouts and helps to 
actively follow up all those who need to complete their vaccinations.
10.2. Data tools for recording and reporting
The following records and reports are the basis of all the information generated at the sub- 
center and higher levels: 
o Mother and Child Protection (MCP) card with counterfoil 
o Mother and Child Register / Immunization Register
o Session Tally Sheet 
o Name based due list to track dropouts and left outs
o Monthly progress report for uploading on the HMIS portal
o U-WIN 
I. Mother and Child Protection (MCP) card with counterfoil 
 The MCP Card is a tool for families to learn, understand and follow positive practices for 
achie-VINg good health of pregnant women, young mothers and children. The card gives 
information on the immunization schedule and the doses of Vitamin A to be given to the 
child during the first five years. Boxes in the chart indicate each type of vaccine, date to 
be given, date when it was given and age. 
Details that would be available from MCP Card are: 
o Next vaccination date - top box - when the child is expected to come for next immunization
o Date of vaccination - against vaccine name - when the child was immunized
How to use the card 
o During the first visit, fill the information on the cover page on “Family Identification and 
Birth Record”
o Record the date, month and year of all entries clearly
o Explain the section on immunization by explaining which vaccines have been given and 
which vaccines are due, with dates
RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTIONRecords, reports and using 
data for action

158o Do not leave any cells or columns blank
o After filling up all the columns, retain the smaller portion of the card (counterfoil)
o Give the rest of the filled-in card to the parent of the child after immunization and ask her 
/him to bring the same card during her / his subsequent visits to the health centre
o Advise families to keep the card in a safe place to prevent it from damage
o Advise families to bring the card along when they visit the Anganwadi Centre (AWC), SC, 
health centre, private doctor or a hospital
o At the end of each session, the counterfoils should be placed in the appropriate pocket of 
the tracking bag
o Each month, look at the counterfoils in the tracking bag and make sure those children 
come for immunization. If the expected children based on session duelist and/or from the 
MCP card (next vaccination date from the tracking bag), ANM can guide ASHA/mobilizer 
to proactively seek reach out to such families to mobilize the caregiver with beneficiaries 
Fig 10.1 Mother and Child protection (MCP) card and counterfoil (English)
RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

159Fig 10.2 Mother and Child protection (MCP) card and counterfoil (Hindi)
IPV- 
IPV 
Keeping counterfoils in tracking bag helps in: 
•	Preparing a session-wise name-based list of due beneficiaries for sharing with the ASHA/
AWW/ mobilizer 
•	Estimating the vaccine requirement for the next session 
•	Tracking the dropouts 
•	Providing information, if the beneficiary/parent has lost the immunization card
RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

160The counterfoils need to be filed separately for each session site. A cloth-tracking bag with 15 
pockets is a simple, easy to use tool for filing the counterfoils (Fig.10.3). The first 12 pockets 
indicate each of the 12 months of the year. The thirteenth pocket is for those who left/ died 
during the period, the fourteenth pocket is for fully immunized children and the fifteenth 
pocket is to store blank MCP cards.
Once a beneficiary is immunized, the counterfoil would be placed in the month (pocket) due 
for the next dose (see Fig 10.3). For example, if a child comes for Penta 1 in January, Penta 2 
is due in February. Update and place the counterfoil in the February pocket. When the Penta 
2 dose is given in February, update the counterfoil and move to the pocket for March. When 
the Penta 3 dose is given in March, then update and place the counterfoil in the September/ 
October pocket since the child has to return for MR vaccine at nine completed months.
•	If some cards are left in the pocket at the end of the month, it indicates that the beneficiaries 
are the dropouts
•	Move these cards to the next month’s pocket and track them
In case no tracking bag is available, counterfoils for each month can be separately tied with 
different rubber bands and labelled. File counterfoils for each session site separately and do 
not forget to carry them to the session.
Fig. 10.3 Immunization tracking with the help of tracking bag
Fill the counterfoil and place it in the month pocket due for 
next dose
Before due immunization sessio n ASHA/AWW/ mobilizer 
should track the child and invite for the due vaccin e dose.
If the child happens to miss the due dose  in that given 
month, then this counterfoil  is filled again with reaso n for 
missin g the dose and thereafter put in the pocket due for 
next sessio n.
Counterfoils  of all children successf ully completing 2nd
year immunization will end up in green pocket. 
Counterfoil of children that have died or left area 
permanently will end up in red pocket 
Completely 
Immunized Children
II. Mother and child register / Immunization Register/ RCH register 
 Immunization / RCH registers help to record and track each pregnancy and 
immunization. It should be:
•	 updated to include new pregnancies and births from the records of AWWs and 
ASHAs/ link workers before each immunization session
•	 updated after each session on the basis of counterfoils filled during the session
•	 if the beneficiary is from outside the catchment area, the HW should issue a new card RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

161and give appropriate vaccination. Record should be entered in the non-resident 
column of the register
•	 if the beneficiary receives vaccination from a private practitioner, the HW should 
record the same in the RCH register and the immunization card and write “P” after 
the date
Ask the AWW/ASHA for the name of the newborns and record them in the register so that 
they are not leftout.
III. Session Tally sheets: 
Tally sheets are the formats that are marked every time a health worker administers a dose of 
vaccine. They are used to monitor performance and complete monthly reporting. New tally 
sheet should be used for each session.
Tally sheet records vaccinations given, by marking them after beneficiary receives a dose. 
The dose is recorded in the immunization register and on the immunization card and the 
caregiver is informed of which vaccinations were given. 
IV. Name based due list to track due beneficiaries for RI session: (explained in microplan 
chapter)
•	 This form is prepared by ANM to enlist the beneficiaries due for vaccination. This is 
prepared prior to RI session and utilized by ASHA/ mobilizers for mobilization of due 
beneficiaries to RI session/s
•	 After the RI session, the reason for due beneficiaries not turning up to RI session 
is documented by ANM with the support of ASHAs, AWWs, link worker and other 
mobilizers. Different reasons could be child out of house/ house locked (R1); Sick 
child (R2); Refusal (R3); Already vaccinated in other RI session/ in private (R4); AEFI 
apprehension (R5); Others (R6). These beneficiaries should be tracked and if not 
vaccinated, their names should be included in the due list prepared for subsequent 
session
•	 Due list is not only helpful in tracking the beneficiaries who did not turn up for the 
current vaccination session, but also to track those who would become due for the 
upcoming RI session
V. Monthly progress report for uploading on the HMIS portal 
The Monthly Progress Report is a report of the SC/ ANM area submitted by the ANM at the end 
of each month. This report is based on correctly filled tally sheets. Data must be recorded 
completely and correctly as follows:
•	Yearly target of infants must be based on actual head count
•	Immunization with each antigen dose needs to be filled in correctly
•	All VPDs and AEFIs should be reported to the PHC for followup
The cumulative coverage will enable you to calculate the coverage of each antigen and the 
dropout rates. Since this is the basis of obtaining all coverage and epidemiological data at 
state and national levels, the data must be recorded accurately.
The Medical officer should review the appropriate section of immunization data and diseases 
under surveillance (AFP, Diphtheria, Pertussis, Neonatal Tetanus, MR) including AEFIs in the 
HMIS portal for PHC/UPHC and Subcenter.
RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

162Table. No.10.1: HMIS formats – Sections for RI, VPD surveillance  
Sl. 
No.Topics Sections in PHC/ UPHC 
formatSections in SC 
format
1 Pregnant women immunization M 1.2.1 – 1.2.3 M 1.2.1 – 1.2.3
2 Child immunization including AEFIs M9 M8
3 VPD surveillance M 10.1.4 – 10.1.9 -
VI. Recording and Reporting on U-WIN:
 Vaccinator Module:  Real-time data entry will be done by Vaccinators at the RI session 
sites updating all the vaccine doses administered to each beneficiary. The Vaccinator 
module will be used to register and record the services which are being delivered on the 
day of the session for Children and Pregnant Women.
U-WIN Registration: 
At home registration of beneficiaries by Vaccinators  - Based on the information collected by 
the ASHAs/other mobilizers during the headcount survey, there will be a provision where the 
Vaccinators (mainly ANMs) can collect this data from the ASHAs/ other mobilizers in the hard 
copy format and pre-register the beneficiaries and update their previous vaccination history 
in the Vaccinator module. Additionally, a provision for ASHAs to pre-register beneficiaries at 
time of head count survey is also available.
Onsite registration of beneficiaries:  Vaccinator will register the beneficiaries who are 
coming to the RI session sites as walk-in beneficiaries 
Steps of recording of beneficiaries at RI session site:  
Key steps at the session site level would include – 
1. Identity verification 
2. Update previous Vaccination History 
3. Record vaccine administered in present visit 
4. Generate digital e-Vaccination certificate
AEFI Reporting
•	There is a provision for reporting of AEFIs from U-WIN and sharing of data and information 
between U-WIN and SAFE-VAC
•	Vaccinators can view the list of beneficiaries in vaccinator module of the U-WIN. From the 
list, vaccinator can report AEFI of identified beneficiary through a button “Report AEFI” 
against each beneficiary. Some of the data points in the AEFI reporting form will be auto 
populated by system and others will have to be filled in by the vaccinator
•	After completing the form and filling information in all mandatory data field, the vaccinator 
can click “Submit” button to submit the form. A confirmation message will appear on 
the screen. After confirmation, the data will be submitted and transported to SAFE-VAC 
through APIs and an AEFI ID will be reverted to U-WIN from SAFE-VAC for reference
For detailed information on accessing and navigating the various modules U-WIN, the 
staff members may refer to the U-WIN SOP DocumentRECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

163VII. Coverage Monitoring Chart 
 Coverage monitoring chart is a useful tool which provides information at a glance on 
target figures and the immunization coverage, particularly in terms of leftouts and 
dropouts. The supervisor should plot the immunization data on the chart during visits to 
the SC (as given in Fig. 10.4). It should be updated every month.
Here is an example for calculating coverage, dropouts and leftouts for Penta1 and Penta3. A 
similar chart can be prepared for other vaccines.
The coverage-monitoring chart has a vertical and a horizontal axis. Vertical axis is divided 
into 12 equal parts, each representing the monthly target. Write cumulative target against 
each month. If the yearly target of infants in a Sub-centre is 120 children, then the monthly 
target is 120 /12 = 10 children. Therefore, the cumulative target for April will be 10; for May it 
will be 20 (10 + 10); for June it will be 30 (10 + 10 + 10); for July it will be 40 (10 + 10 + 10 + 10), 
etc.
On the horizontal axis, the months of the year are given starting from April to March. In the 
rows below each month, write the total number of children immunized with Penta 1 and Penta 
3 during that month and also cumulative till that month. On the graph, plot the cumulative 
total of Penta 1 for each month (on the right side of the column). Similarly, plot for Penta 3 in 
a different colour in the same column.
Fig. no. 10.4: Coverage monitoring chart
RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

164Calculating coverage for an antigen at any time = Total Antigen administered X 100 Yearly 
target
 
Eg- Coverage for Penta 1 from Apr till July is: 104 / 360 X 100 = 28.8% rounded off = 29%
 
 
ANM should ensure that coverage of ALL ANTIGENS and DOSES are more than 90%. 
Every dose should be recorded in U-WIN.
Reasons for low immunization coverage
Low immunization coverage puts the entire community and area at risk of vaccine preventable 
diseases. This low coverage can be because of dropouts or left outs including zero dose 
children. 
•	Left-outs – Children who have never received any vaccination as per UIP
•	Drop-outs – Children who have received one or more vaccines but did not complete the 
vaccination as per the age
•	Zero-dose children - are those who have not received first dose of Pentavalent vaccine by 
one year of age 
There are many factors that influence the immunization coverage. Listed in the table below 
are some of the issues identified by the health service providers across many states. 
Table 10.1 Common issues affecting the immunization coverage Leftout, Dropout, 
Zerodose
Immunization 
services• vacant SCs (some areas remain without immunization services)
• weak tracking of children (large number of dropout and leftout 
children)
• fixed timing of sessions (not suitable for the some communities)
• stock out of vaccines, diluents, AD syringes, hubcutters, 
immunization cards, etc.
Staffing • vacancies of ANMs and doctors
• irrational distribution of ANMs
Training • lack of supervision and guidance by MOs
• absence of regular training and refresher training
• poor availability of trainers and quality of training
Planning • weak or absent RI microplans, absence of validation of areas
• lack of involvement of MOs in RI microplanning
• lack of involvement of other departments like Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS) and urban bodies
• difficulties in urban areas planningRECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

165Community 
involvement and 
communication• poor understanding and misconceptions about immunization in 
the community (weak interpersonal communication skills or lack of 
efforts to meet the community members)
• four key messages not delivered (fear of minor reactions and AEFls 
not addressed)
• IEC material not displayed at session site
Leadership • poor supervision and review mechanism
Financial support • delayed incentive payments for RI activities like alternate vaccine 
delivery (AVD) payments, ASHA incentives 
• delay in preparation of statement of expenditures for the released 
funds
In addition to the above, geographical, cultural and social factors also have an impact on 
the community’s faith in immunization which affects the immunization coverage. Health 
workers should have the capacity to identify the reasons for low immunization coverage and 
appraise the issues to medical officer for corrective actions. 
RECORDS, REPORTS AND USING DATA FOR ACTION

166

167CommunicationUnit 11

168Key contents Page
11.1. Reasons for missed children and possible interventions 169
11.2.  Community engagement 173
11.3. Interpersonal communication 173
11.4.  Risk/ crisis communication 175Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, health worker should be able: 
• To identify the reasons for children missing vaccinations (dropouts or 
left outs) and possible interventions 
• To involve community to support immunization 
• To use effective IPC skills for communicating with caregivers 
• To conduct an effective community meeting

169Introduction
The goal of health workers is to ensure that all children in SC/ ANM area are fully immunized 
before their first birthday. The immunization-targeted community can be divided into three 
groups as shown in Fig.11.1. The aim is to expand the inner circle to cover the entire universe 
of eligible children in the catchment area.
From a service delivery perspective: 
•	Left outs  are those children who have 
not received any vaccine under UIP 
(unimmunized)
•	Zero-dosers  are those children who  
have not received first dose of 
Pentavalent vaccine by one year of age.
•	Dropouts  are those children who 
started vaccination and received one 
or more UIP vaccine/s but did not 
complete the schedule as per the age 
(partially immunized)
From a behavioural perspective, a large 
percentage of dropouts is a serious problem because it reflects the poor perception of 
parents/ caregivers about the benefits of vaccination or of the immunization service delivery 
system, or both, combined with other barriers that forces them to place immunization on a 
low priority.
People who “dropout” of the immunization system are the easiest to reach and be convinced 
to return for full immunization.
11.1 Reasons for missed children and possible interventions  
Table 11.1 below gives the common reasons for missed children (left outs, dropouts and Zero 
dose children) and the possible interventions to reach them.Communication
 
COMMUNICATIONFig.no.11.1. Pictorial representation of Fully 
immunized, Dropouts and left out children

170Table 11.1 Reasons for missed children and possible interventions
Possible reasons Possible interventions
Demand-side issues
Parents not motivated 
to immunize children 
because of their poor 
understanding of its 
purpose and importance•	Engage with community leaders, school teachers, faith/
religious leaders, youth networks, women’s self-help 
groups (SHGs) CSOs, and encourage them to talk to 
parents about the benefits of immunization
•	Build capacities of HWs to counsel and effectively 
communicate with parents and the community on the 
importance of immunization
•	Disseminate information on the benefits of immunization 
at health fairs and other events and make people aware of 
immunization services
•	Specific Demand Generation Engagement of Male 
Individuals / Fathers
•	Use of various communication channels including Cable 
TV, Radio ( both All India Radio and Community Radio); 
social media platforms ( Facebook, Whats App,/SMS, X, 
Instagram, outdoor media ( bill-boards, posters, digital 
screens), IEC materials, Traditional folk media and 
religious place announcements by faith leaders)
Cultural or religious 
reasons for refusal 
of vaccination 
(myths, rumours and 
misconceptions)•	Find out the reasons for reluctance by talking 
directly to communities/leaders. Try to address their 
misconceptions, doubts and fears by listening to them and 
offering support
•	Involve community leaders (particularly the ones 
favourable to immunization) and other staff working 
within that particular community in order to encourage 
their fellow members to have their children immunized
•	Arrange for an interaction between resistant groups 
and satisfied beneficiaries in the area to promote 
immunization
Fear of side-effects or 
AEFI in the community 
discourages parents to 
immunize their children•	Involve religious leaders, village elders, school teachers 
and Panchayati raj institution (PRI) members to 
accompany the field level workers (FLWs) during their 
house-to-house mobilization visits, organize folk shows to 
educate parents and communities on the importance of RI 
for children and dispel myths and misconceptions
•	Remind HWs to always tell parents/caregivers about 
common side-effects that may occur and what to do if 
they occur
•	Investigate any AEFI and appraise the community of the 
details of the case, possible causes and actions taken
Fear of Multiple injections 
to the baby (caregivers)•	Inform that it is safe to give multiple injections to the baby 
•	Counsel that, if the baby misses out any injection, then the 
child is vulnerable to that particular vaccine preventable 
diseaseCOMMUNICATION

171Financial or gender 
barriers to immunization, 
e.g., husbands disallowing 
wives to attend sessions 
because of time/loss of 
daily wages/expenses•	Counsel opinion leaders and influential persons about the 
dangers of VPDs and the benefits of immunization
•	Encourage peer counselling by fathers of children who 
accepts immunization
•	Publicize that immunization services are entirely free
Refugees/families that fear 
contact with government, 
e.g., those who lack 
documents/ scheduled 
castes or tribes/ nomadic 
groups/homeless families/
urban slums/street 
children•	Determine where these populations reside
•	Visit the communities and work with local mobilizers/
educators/community groups/leaders to discuss reasons 
why they are not accessing immunization services
•	Provide information through appropriate communication 
channels on the importance of vaccination and date, time 
and place of the next nearest session
•	Develop a list of children who have never accessed 
immunization services in the area and share it with HWs of 
the area for immunization and ensure follow-up
Supply-side issues
All newborns and 
infants not
identified and listed•	Involve AWWs/ASHAs to identify and share lists of all 
newborns and children with the ANMs
•	Explain the AHSA/ AWW about the importance of mobilizing 
all beneficiaries
•	Ensure that all the beneficiaries including beneficiaries 
amongst visitors, relatives, new tenants, nomads, etc. are 
mobilized
Sessions too infrequent 
or timings and days 
not convenient/not 
understood•	Plan sessions after consulting the community, e.g. early 
morning, holidays, Sundays, etc .
•	Plan for “On demand Vaccination”  – engaging with 
the communities to plan the day, time and venue of the 
immunization sessions, particularly for the vulnerable missed 
communities
Session site too far 
away, e.g.
border populations•	Include all the areas in the microplan
•	Reorganize the catchment area so that remote sites are 
visited at least once every 2 or 3 months (plan at least 4 
immunization sessions a year)
•	Work with neighbouring health facilities to coordinate 
services for border areas
•	Improve outreach to communities through appropriate 
transport, additional staff and publicize outreach services
Parents do not return 
because sessions are 
not held as planned 
or vaccines are 
unavailable•	In case of HW being on leave or the health facility is vacant, 
deploy alternate vaccinators
•	Ensure alternate delivery of vaccines to session sites.
•	Encourage community groups to share the feedback 
regarding HWs presence on session day to health center
•	Conduct session monitoring and make real improvements, 
then publicize the improvements to communities
•	Ensure adequate supplies of vaccines and logistics
COMMUNICATION

172HWs do not clearly 
explain to parents what 
vaccines are due, when 
they are due and why 
they are needed•	Remind HWs/AWWs/ASHAs to always convey the 4 key 
messages to parents in a simple and understandable 
language
•	Train HWs to provide filled-in MCP cards to all beneficiaries 
and to write the next due date on the card
•	HWs to update U-WIN and inform about the same to the 
beneficiaries
•	Ask caregivers to repeat the information given to them in 
order to increase the chances that they will remember when 
to return. Praise correct answers
•	Appreciate parent/caregivers for bringing their child for 
vaccination
•	Ensure that IEC materials are prominently displayed at the 
session site
HWs do not show 
respect towards 
parents or interest 
in the child’s health, 
e.g.- long waits, HWs 
shouting at mothers for 
forgetting the card or 
bringing the baby late•	Sensitize and train HWs, ASHAs and AWWs to treat parents 
with respect, communicate with politeness, warmth, 
friendliness and should empathize with the parents’ situation
•	Encourage and praise the parents for bringing their children 
for immunization. Encourage parents to ask questions
•	Guide HWs to visit dropouts before the next session to find 
out the reasons why they missed the session
HWs do not know 
which children are due 
and what vaccines are 
due•	Organize tracking of children using head count survey and 
due list
•	HWs to use the headcount survey to estimate the due 
children/ pregnant women. 
•	HWs can involve community teams (NGOs, community based 
organizations (CBOs), community leaders, PRI member, 
women/youth clubs, schoolteachers, volunteers, etc.) to 
identify children who are left-outs and dropouts
•	Remind parents about the importance of full immunization: 
inform them about the date and time of the next session and 
mobilize parents for immunization sessions
HWs do not 
understand/ explain 
to caregivers that 
immunization may 
be given to mildly ill 
children (false
contraindication)•	Orient HWs that vaccines can be safely provided to a child 
having mild illness, they should explain this fact to parents/
caregivers
•	Vaccination is to be deferred in seriously ill beneficiaries
Children and mothers 
are not seeking 
immunization when 
coming to the HWs for 
curative care (missed 
opportunities)•	When providing other services, always keep an eye on eligible 
children visiting the session with a parent or sibling. Enquire 
about their immunization status or refer to the list of due 
beneficiaries and provide services, as appropriate
•	Put a reminder about immunization in the facility’s waiting 
areaCOMMUNICATION

173Health workers are 
afraid to give multiple 
injections on the same 
visit•	Health workers to be trained on the fact that it is safe to give 
multiple injectable vaccines to the baby 
11.2 Community engagement
Community engagement and accountability brings together community members, leaders, 
influencers and institutions to work together to identify and respond to the community 
challenges to immunization.
The frontline workers play the pivotal role in community engagement, and it is important to 
ensure that ANMs, ASHAs, AWWs and community volunteers are well trained to engage with 
the households and communities.
Some activities include:
1. Sensitize and engage with PRIs/ religious leaders / teachers/ Ration shop dealers/ influencers
2. Community meetings with caregivers 
3. Fathers/ mothers meetings
4. Rallies, announcements through Mosques
5. Interpersonal communication (IPC) with the caregivers
6. Mid media activities like nukkad natak, cycle prachar, miking, etc.
7. Maximizing the community platforms for convergence
8. Engage Immunization Champions/Role Models 
11.3 Interpersonal communication
Interpersonal communication at the households/ individual 
level is the core communication strategy which informs, 
clarifies and empowers individuals to make changes in the 
immunization behaviours. Establishing trust relationship is 
imperative between the providers and the communities. It calls 
for specific skills and values for IPC sessions to be effective. 
IPC sessions provide an opportunity for the caregivers/ 
communities to engage in an open dialogue/ discussion on 
immunization, importance of immunization, details of age 
specific vaccinations that are due for the child, where, when 
the immunization sessions are conducted in the community 
help them make decisions on vaccinating their children. Front 
line workers are expected to engage with communities in 
IPC sessions, provide useful information in a socio-culturally 
acceptable manner, use tools to engage with the caregiver and link them to the services.
IPC sessions are conducted during the home visits and conduct the community meetings to 
mobilize the caregivers and communities to accept the vaccination.
ANMs/ASHAs/AWWs are critical link between health services and communities. FLWs need to 
be trained from time to time to be able to effectively communicate with parents/ caregivers  
COMMUNICATION

174and mobilize them to get their children vaccinated, it is important that their interpersonal 
communication skills be strengthened. They also need to be equipped with appropriate 
knowledge about vaccines and their benefits, and how to counter prevailing myths and 
misconceptions on immunization with facts. A simple IPC approach, GATHER  (Greet, Ask, 
Tell, Help, Explain and Return) to help the FLWs to follow during IPC sessions is explained to 
the FLWs. BRIDGE (Boosting Routine Immunization Demand Generation) training package 
was rolled out by the MoHFW for the FLWs. A refresher training needs to be conducted through 
the sector meetings, use opportunities during monitoring and mentoring visits to hone their 
IPC skills. 
Tips for effective IPC skills for communicating with caregivers 
Speak clearly
•	Use encouraging/helpful non-verbal communication
•	Posture – keep your head level
•	Spend enough time; do not be in a hurry
•	Use responses and gestures to show interest
•	Listen carefully and repeat what the mother says
Greet
•	Smile. Speak in a pleasant voice and tone
•	Maintain eye contact
•	Introduce yourself and your organization
Ask
•	Ask open-ended questions—What? When? Where? Why? How? Who? 
•	How many children do you have? 
•	Why did you not vaccinate your child? 
•	How did you know about the immunization session? 
Tell
•	What diseases are prevented by vaccination?
•	Where and when will the session be held?
•	What minor side-effects can occur after vaccination and how these can be managed?
Help:
Encourage the parents to come for vaccination by telling them about how to manage AEFIs. 
Explain:
Use info-kits to explain the importance of immunization and the immunization schedule.
Repeat:
Use your visit to find out reasons for leftouts and dropouts.
IEC materials display: Increasing visibility and awareness of immunization. Display of 
IEC materials such as poster/ banners/ hoarding/ wall paintings increase the visibility of 
immunization programme.  MOHFW shares the creatives on RI which needs to be printed, 
distributed and ensure its appropriate use. If needed, customize to the local context (change 
of language or visual as necessary).COMMUNICATION

175For example, banners and posters should preferably be in the local language. Make sure that 
what is written or shown is consistent with the guidelines of the programme.
11.4 Risk/ Crisis communication
Communicating with Frontline Health Workers
ANMs, ASHAs, and Anganwadi workers are the first point of contact between the health system 
and the community. It is essential to orient and empower the frontline workers to handle 
basic queries from the community, such as why vaccines are necessary, which all diseases 
can be prevented by vaccination, and what is the potential risk of an adverse event that can 
occur post-vaccination. It is critical to encourage and support health workers to report AEFI, 
especially in case of programme errors.
Communicating with Families and Communities
An effective Information Education and Communication (IEC) strategy helps create awareness 
among the masses to benefit the immunization programme. Also, it sensitizes them about 
the potential risk of an adverse event that may occur post-vaccination. However, if an AEFI 
is reported, immediate steps must be taken to verify the facts and determine what has 
happened. Promptly visiting the affected family and community, mainly if a severe/ serious 
AEFI has occurred, is part of a good response.
Meeting and listening to affected families and community representatives is critical for 
understanding their concerns and fears and demonstrating the commitment to addressing 
the event. If an AEFI investigation is initiated, communities must be informed of the actions 
that have been taken. Furthermore, providing communities with regular updates on the 
investigation status will go a long way toward dispelling potential fears and myths about 
immunization in general. Disseminate a consistent set of easy-to-understand key messages 
to concerned families and communities. Prompt feedback has to be given to the parents 
regarding the results of the causality assessment for AEFI.
Communicating with the Media
Negative media coverage of adverse events following immunization can significantly impact 
public trust in vaccines. Health workers should follow some do’s and don’ts to address as 
mentioned below
Do’s Don’ts
• Notify  appropriate authority in 
cases where the attention of the 
community/media has garnered• Do not speculate on the cause of AEFI
• Reiterate that reporting AEFI does not 
mean the vaccine has caused it• Do not assign blame before the proper and 
complete investigation is done
• To the community, inform that the 
case is being investigated as per the 
national guidelines• Do not COMMENT on causality unless it is 
finalized (the actual cause cannot be known 
immediately)
COMMUNICATION

176COMMUNICATION• Keep the Medical officer/ District 
Immunization Officer informed about 
the developments in the community 
about AEFI apprehension, vaccine 
hesitancy• Do not loose temper and stop 
communication with the community
• Support the ASHA/ mobilizer/ link 
worker when cases are reported and 
boost their confidence• Do not engage with media 

177Surveillance of vaccine 
preventable diseasesUnit 12

178Key contents Page
12.1. The role of surveillance in the immunization programme 179
12.2. Conducting disease surveillance 179
12.3. Recording and reporting of suspected vaccine preventable diseases 181Learning objectives
At the end of the unit, you should be able
• To understand the importance of surveillance in Immunization 
Programme. 
• To describe how to conduct surveillance for the VPDs. 

17912.1. The role of surveillance in the Immunization Programme
Surveillance means data collection for action. Disease surveillance is a regular system of 
collecting, analyzing and interpreting data and then using it to guide disease-control and 
immunization strategies. It helps in the following ways: 
•	To find out What disease is occurring 
•	To find out Who  gets the disease – e.g., in a particular population or group of people 
•	To find out Where  the disease is occurring - this helps to identify areas requiring special 
attention and where system performance is poor
•	To understand When  the disease is occurring and how many get the disease 
•	To understand Why  the disease is occurring – e.g., due to less vaccination
•	To decide How  the disease can be prevented, controlled or eliminated
12.2. Conducting disease surveillance
Prerequisites for effective surveillance 
•	Standard case definitions (to ensure uniformity in reporting) 
•	Recording and reporting system (to ensure regularity in reporting) 
•	List of all the reporting sites (to ensure completeness in reporting) 
The quality of surveillance data depends upon correct diagnostic criteria, timeliness and 
completeness of reports.
Step 1: Recognition of the disease
A set of standard case definitions are used to recognize the disease in the community for 
quick response. Health worker should be aware of all the case definitions of the diseases. The 
standard case definitions of VPD cases are mentioned in the table below.
SURVEILLANCE OF VACCINE PREVENTABLE DISEASESSurveillance of 
vaccine preventable 
diseases

180Table 12.1  VPD case definitions:
Disease Case definition
Polio (Acute Flaccid 
Paralysis)Acute flaccid paralysis is defined as sudden onset of weakness 
and floppiness in any part of the body in a child < 15 years of age 
OR 
Paralysis in a person of any age in whom polio is suspected by 
clinician.
Measles-Rubella (Fe -
ver-rash)Any person with fever and maculopapular rash OR
Any person in whom a clinician or health worker suspects 
measles or rubella infection.
Diphtheria A suspected case of diphtheria is defined as an illness of the 
upper respiratory tract characterized by the following: laryngitis 
or pharyngitis or nasopharyngitis or tonsillitis, and adherent 
membranes of tonsils, pharynx and/or nose.
Pertussis A person of any age with a cough lasting ≥ 2 weeks (of any 
duration in an infant), with at least one of the following 
symptoms: a) paroxysms (fits of coughing); b) inspiratory 
whooping; c) post tussive vomiting (vomiting immediately 
after coughing); d) apnoea in infants; OR clinician suspicion of 
pertussis.
Neonatal Tetanus Any neonate who could suck and cry normally during the first 
2 days of life and who cannot suck normally between 3 and 
28 days of age, and becomes stiff or has convulsions/spasms 
(jerking of the muscles) OR 
Any neonate who dies of an unknown cause during the first 
month of life. 
Tuberculosis A person w i t h  fever and/or cough for more than 2 weeks, 
with loss of weight/no weight gain and history of contact with 
a suspected or diagnosed case of active TB disease within the 
last 2 years.
Bacterial meningitis Any person with sudden onset of fever (> 38.5°C rectal or 38.0°C 
axillary) and one of the following signs: neck stiffness with one 
or more of the following (a) Headache, vomiting, (b) altered 
consciousness (c) other meningeal signs (d) Petechial or purpuric 
rash.
In patients <2-year, suspect meningitis when fever accompanied by 
bulging fontanelle.
Hepatitis B An acute illness typically including acute jaundice, dark urine, 
anorexia, malaise, extreme fatigue and right upper quadrant 
tenderness.
Japanese Encephalitis 
(Acute Encephalitis 
Syndrome - AES)A person of any age, at any time of the year with acute onset of 
fever and change in mental status (including symptoms such as 
confusion, disorientation, coma or inability to talk) AND/OR  new 
onset of seizures (excluding simple febrile seizures).
ASHAs, mobilizers and link workers should also be sensitized on identification of vaccine 
preventable diseases.SURVEILLANCE OF VACCINE PREVENTABLE DISEASES

181Step 2: Ensure all cases are reported and recorded for public health action 
Ensure that, all cases (based on the standard case definition mentioned in the table) are 
reported to the Medical Officer. The types of cases that should be included in Health worker’s 
monthly report are: 
•	Cases that come to the health facilities (both government and private) for treatment 
•	All cases seen and diagnosed by health workers at outreach sessions 
•	Cases that the health worker hear about in the community. In such instance, verify the 
case in person
12.3. Recording and reporting of suspected Vaccine preventable diseases
To ensure completeness in reporting, the health worker should document the VPDs in the 
VPD surveillance register and report these cases to the medical officer immediately. The 
reports of these cases should be sent through S form at the subcenter level. Weekly VPD H002 
form from planning unit or block PHC should be shared to block or district. Also on monthly 
basis, the number of VPD cases should be reported in the HMIS report.
In order to use data effectively, it must be as reliable and accurate as possible. It is important 
that each case is counted only once.
Step 3: Public health action in the form of Active case search (ACS) in community: 
Searching for additional cases of similar VPDs in the community helps in identifying clustering 
of cases. This can prevent an impending outbreak by early identification and public health 
interventions.
Attempts should be made to conduct active case search soon after identification of a 
suspected case preferably within seven days of case investigation.
•	Besides conducting the active case search in household and neighbourhood, the workplace 
or school contacts should also be actively assessed for the illness
•	ACS has to be conducted after proper microplanning and training. Logistics of sample 
collection and shipment should be arranged beforehand by the medical officer
•	While conducting ACS look for additional cases according to the case definition that has 
been communicated during training
•	During ACS usually the case definitions are simplified and made more sensitive e.g. for 
diphtheria, screening of recent sore throat in all age groups may be required. Standardized 
forms are to be used to facilitate ACS in the community
•	On identification of a suspected case, the detailed information of the illness has to be 
captured in the ACS form of the respective disease outbreaks
•	These suspected cases are then investigated by a medical officer who would also clinically 
manage the cases and suggest interventions
SURVEILLANCE OF VACCINE PREVENTABLE DISEASES

182Table No. 12.2. Roles and responsibilities of different staff in VPD surveillance:
Staff Roles & responsibilities
ANM•	Should be aware of case definitions of VPDs and promptly notify VPDs to 
medical officer
•	Conduct additional active case search in the community in response to 
reporting of VPD case
•	Prepare line list of all the suspected cases
•	Include all the left out and drop out children upto 16 years of age in the due list 
and ensure age appropriate vaccination
•	Ensure case management and referral service
•	Generate awareness of local transmission of VPDs and its control measures 
among the local community and stakeholders
•	To sensitize ASHAs, mobilizers, link workers on identification of VPDs
ASHA•	Should be aware of case definitions of VPDs and promptly notify VPDs to ANM/ 
Medical officer
•	Generate awareness of local transmission of VPDs and its control measures 
among the local community and stakeholders
•	Conduct head count survey of unvaccinated/under vaccinated children 
in < 5yrs in the community and ensure vaccination of left out and dropout 
beneficiaries
•	Identify children missed for 2nd booster of DPT , Td 10 and Td 16 years doses 
during head count survey and mobilize these for vaccinationSURVEILLANCE OF VACCINE PREVENTABLE DISEASES

183U-WIN: Digital Platform for 
Data Recording & ReportingUnit 13

184Key contents Page
13.1. Introduction on U-WIN 185
13.2. U-WIN modules 185Learning objectives
• To understand the concept of U-WIN and modules for effective 
implementation of U-WIN for capturing immunization data

18513.1. Introduction on U-WIN
MoHFW has rolled out Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network called e-VIN to provide real 
time information on vaccine stock & storage temperature across all cold-chain points in the 
country. Based on e-VIN, Co-WIN was rolled out for beneficiary management, recording and 
reporting of COVID-19 vaccination. After the success of Co-WIN Platform, it was decided to 
have similar software-based tool named “U-WIN” (Winning with Universal Immunization 
Programme) for recording & reporting of each and every vaccination provided under Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP). All efforts should be made to identify and register all the 
beneficiaries who are not registered in U-WIN.
Key features of U-WIN : - 
•	Establishing single source of truth for immunization data
•	Near real time availability of vaccination data 
•	QR code-based e-Vaccination certificates 
•	Individualized antigen and dose wise tracking of beneficiaries
•	Automated reminders through SMS for due vaccine doses 
•	Universal search - mitigating inter-state and intra-state migration issue
•	All planned vaccination sessions to be published in U-WIN
•	Citizen interface for self-registration, booking online vaccination appointment along with 
provision for walk in registration 
•	Creation of ABHA and Child ABHA can also be done through U-WIN
•	Engagement of private sector immunization service providers
13.2. Modules of U-WIN
U-WIN is a web and mobile based application. It has the following modules which are accessed 
through OTP based text SMS authentication.
A. Registration and Scheduling Module  
•	This is the only module which is available in public domain to be used by the beneficiaries 
•	Registration can be done online for pregnant women and children
•	Pregnant women can do self-registration and they can also be registered by tagging 
Co-WIN data base
•	Children/infant can be registered through linkage with Mother/Father/Guardian
•	Beneficiary can book an appointment for vaccination and generate appointment slips 
•	Download Vaccination Acknowledgement/ QR based vaccination certificate
U-WIN: DIGITAL PLATFORM FOR DATA RECORDING& REPORTINGU-WIN: Digital Platform for 
Data Recording  
& Reporting

186U-WIN ModulesRegistration
& Scheduling
ModuleAdministrator
Module &
Session PlanningVaccinator
ModuleNewborn
Vaccination
ModuleMobilizer
Module
BeneficiariesProgramme
ManagersVaccinatorsHealthcare Workers
at Delivery PointFrontline Workers
like ASHAs
B.  Administrator Module 
•	This module will be used by state, district, subdistrict and health facility user
•	Creation of all Health Facilities, Sub-Centers and RI Session Sites 
o Mapping of Block/Village/ULB/Ward (LGD and non-LGD*) 
o Tag as newborn vaccination site, whether has SCs/ ANM area under it 
•	Integration with other portals to ensure inter-operability and unified database – e-VIN, 
ABDM, NiN, RCH, POSHAN tracker
•	U-WIN is compliant with ABDM under which health facility registry (HFR) ID for health 
facilities and Health Professional Registry (HPR) ID for health workers are to be made 
and linked with U-WIN
•	Adding and tagging of Human Resource involved in Immunization service delivery 
(U-WIN users) – State/District/Sub-district Administrators, Health Facilities and 
Newborn vaccination site managers, Vaccinators, Mobilizers 
•	Session Planning & Management – Creation and publishing of RI Sessions  
 * non-LGD areas include health blocks, health villages, wards, etc.   
Session Planning and Management by Health Facility Manager:  
•	Health Facility Manager will be responsible for the Creation and publishing of RI Sessions.  
•	The UIP Vaccination Session Sites  tab will be used for creating sessions while the UIP 
Vaccination Sessions  tab will be used for viewing the ongoing, scheduled, canceled, and 
completed vaccination sessions.    Session type to be selected as RI session, select the 
Dates from the calendar for the planned upcoming sessions - dates can be entered for up 
to next 3 months. The dates on which session have already been created and published 
will be highlighted and non-selectable in the calendar menu. Next select the Start time 
and End time for the session and the Total Beneficiary Capacity for the planned session. 
All sessions that were planned through microplanning process needs to be created and 
published in U-WIN.
Sessions once created and published in U-WIN can be rescheduled but cannot be cancelled.U-WIN: DIGITAL PLATFORM FOR DATA RECORDING& REPORTING

187C. Vaccinator Module
•	The Vaccinator module will be used to register and record the vaccination services 
provided at the session for beneficiaries
·	Conducting Vaccination Sessions
o Once the health care worker starts the session s/he will be able to see the list of 
the beneficiaries who have booked online appointments and will also be able to 
do on-site registration of beneficiaries (walk-in).
o Key steps would include – 
1. Identity verification
2. Update previous Vaccination History based on available vaccination records
3. Record vaccine administered in the present visit
4. Generate digital e-Vaccination certificate
5. Reporting of AEFI
·	ASHA Management  – ANM should add ASHA workers or mobilizers and map the 
villages/wards/ mohalla, etc. with them
·	ANM will be able to see the list of all beneficiaries (both vaccinated and due) for her 
catchment area
·	Pre-registration of beneficiaries by Vaccinators  - based on the information 
collected by the ASHAs/Other mobilizers during the headcount survey, there will 
be a provision where the Vaccinators (mainly ANMs) to collect this data from the 
ASHAs/other mobilizers in the hard copy format and pre-register the beneficiaries 
and update their previous vaccination history in the Vaccinator module
D. Newborn vaccination module
All birth dose vaccination details will be recorded in this module by staff nurse/ANM of the 
delivery point.
The details of the pregnant woman with regards to ANC and pregnancy outcome, registration 
of newborn will be primarily recorded through RCH 2.0. Till the time RCH 2.0 is rolled out 
U-WIN will be capturing these data.
E. Mobilizer Module  
This module will be used by ASHA/ mobilisers/ link worker, etc. Once the session has been 
created in U-WIN, the mobilisers will be able to see the detail of the sessions through this 
module. 
•	The mobilizer will be able to view the list of vaccinated and due beneficiaries in their 
catchment area
•	For the eligible beneficiaries not registered (as per paper-based duelist), mobiliser can 
preregister the beneficiary or facilitate registration on session site by ANM or guiding 
beneficiary to register by self-registration portal 
•	ASHA/ mobilizer can also download e-vaccination certificate for the vaccinated 
beneficiaries
F. Reports Module
There will be a drill down option (National<State<District<Sub-district<Health Facility<Session 
Site) at each level based on the level of login. These reports can be downloaded in excel 
format.
U-WIN: DIGITAL PLATFORM FOR DATA RECORDING& REPORTING

188There will be an option in the reports to get data of following duration – Today (present date), 
Cumulative and Date Range.
Some of the important reports are as follows:
1. Coverage Report  
The real-time data entry will be done by Vaccinators updating all the vaccine doses 
administered to each beneficiary. 
They will get aggregated in the Coverage report which can be accessed at all levels from the 
National Administrator to the Health Facility level. 
The coverage report will have the following key data elements - 
1. Sessions Planned and Sessions Held 
2. Number of Pregnant women, infants (0-1 years), children (1-5 years) and adolescent 
vaccinated (10 & 16 years)
3. Vaccine and dose wise coverage data
2. Registration Report  
This report on the Registrations done will be available to programme managers. It has the 
data of the fresh registrations done (online and on-site) in 3 categories - Pregnant women, 
infants (0-1 years), children (1-5 years) and adolescents (10 & 16 years).
3. RI Session sites & Sessions Status  
Session Sites  - has data points entered by Health Facility Manager (State, district, sub-
district, Health facility, e-VIN CCP). 
Session Status  - The created sessions could be categorized under 3 groups – completed, 
ongoing and scheduled. This report will have line-list of all published sessions with timing 
of planned session, actual time when the session was started by vaccinator and name of the 
vaccinator assigned for the session. 
Upcoming sessions  - this report will have details of future, upcoming sessions created and 
published by the Health Facility Managers as per the micro-plan.  
There are various other reports available like details of users, health facilities, etc. in report 
section.
AEFI Reporting  
There will be a provision for reporting of Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFIs) from 
U-WIN and sharing of data and information between U-WIN and SAFE-VAC.
With integration with U-WIN, SAFE-VAC can be used by Vaccinators and District Immunization 
Officers (DIO) to report cases. Following major advancements can be seen in SAFE-VAC after 
integration with U-WIN:
1. Besides DIO, vaccinator can also report AEFIs through U-WIN.
2. All types of AEFIs – minor, severe and serious can be reported in this version.
3. Vaccinator/health worker/ANM will have access to the beneficiary list of his/her jurisdiction 
for the purpose of reporting AEFI
General guidelines
1. ANM / vaccinator who has user ID and password for U-WIN can also report AEFI through 
U-WIN.
2. A vaccinator can report an AEFI to anyone of her/his beneficiary through U-WIN if U-WIN: DIGITAL PLATFORM FOR DATA RECORDING& REPORTING

189vaccination details have been entered into U-WIN.
3. A vaccinator can report AEFI multiple times for a beneficiary, but only once after each 
date of vaccination. Therefore, vaccinator can report AEFI after each date of vaccination in 
U-WIN.
4. It is date of vaccination in U-WIN against which AEFI is reported, and not against individual 
vaccine/antigen.
5. All cases, whether reported by vaccinator, will appear in AEFI line-list in district 
administrator module and can be viewed by DIO and higher-level users.
Process of reporting of AEFI
1. To report the AEFI cases, Vaccinators need to login in UWIN using their credentials. After 
login, the “Report AEFI” tab will be visible on the left side of the screen.
2. Vaccinators can search the beneficiaries for whom AEFI has to be reported using 
beneficiary/mother/father/guardian’s registered mobile number or list of IDs as given in 
the list in UWIN.
3. After searching, all beneficiaries associated with the mobile number or ID will be auto 
populated. Vaccinator then need to click on “Report AEFI” for which he/she/they want to 
report the AEFI associated with the beneficiary. 
4. Vaccinator will follow step-by-step process to complete the information in AEFI notification 
form and will submit it.
Vaccination data of beneficiary should be uploaded on the same day of vaccination on real time 
basis by vaccinator. If due to any reason it is not possible for the vaccinator to upload data in 
U-WIN on the same day of vaccination, it can be uploaded next day till 5 PM only if the session 
is not closed in U-WIN . In all cases efforts should be made to upload vaccination data in U-WIN 
on the same day of vaccination.  
For detailed information on accessing and navigating the various modules U-WIN, health 
workers may refer to the U-WIN user manuals.
U-WIN: DIGITAL PLATFORM FOR DATA RECORDING& REPORTING

190

191Frequently Asked QuestionsUnit 14

192

193
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONSFrequently Asked Questions
General queries on immunization
1. Why are vaccines administered at specific sites?
 Vaccines are administered at specific sites to maintain uniformity and for helping 
surveyors in verifying the receipt of the particular vaccine. e.g., BCG is administered on 
the left upper arm.
2. Why should there be a minimum gap of 4 weeks between two doses of a vaccine?
 There should be a minimum of 4 weeks gap between two doses because decreasing 
the interval between doses may not achieve optimal antibody production required for 
protection.
3. How long can a bottle of Vitamin A be used, once opened?
 A Vitamin A bottle, once opened, should be used within 8 weeks. Write the date of 
opening on the bottle. It must be kept away from direct sunlight. Please refer to the 
latest guideline provided by the Child Health division for the same. Guidance on Vitamin 
A administration is revised and updated from time to time. In routine immunization, 
Vitamin A is administered at 9 months, 16-18 months and then at the interval of 6 months 
till the age of 5 years. A total of 9 doses are given under routine immunization.
4. What is the dose of Zinc to be used along with ORS in the treatment of diarrhea?
 The dose of zinc for infants aged 2–6 months is 10 mg of dispersible tablet in expressed 
breast milk for 14 days. For children 6 months to 5 years of age, it is 20 mg of dispersible 
tablet for 14 days. Guidance on Zinc administration is revised and updated from time 
to time. Please refer to the latest guideline provided by the Child Health division for the 
same.
Queries on immunization schedule
1. If a child is brought late for a subsequent dose, should one restart with the first dose 
of a vaccine?
 No, do not restart the schedule again; pick up where the schedule was left off. For 
example, if a child who has received BCG, Penta 1 and bOPV 1 at 5 months of age returns 
at 11 months of age, then vaccinate the child with Penta 2, bOPV 2, MR 1, fIPV1, Rotavirus 
vaccine 1, PCV 1 and JE 1 (where applicable).

1942. If a child who has never been vaccinated is brought in at 9 completed months but 
before 12 completed months of age, then, can all the due vaccines be given to a child 
on the same day?
 Yes, all the due vaccines can be given during the same session but at recommended 
injection sites, using separate AD syringes. It is safe and effective to give BCG, Pentavalent, 
bOPV, IPV, MR, RVV, PCV, JE (where applicable) vaccines and Vitamin A at the same time to 
the 9-month-old child, who has never been vaccinated. NEVER MIX TWO VACCINES IN ONE 
SYRINGE. Always use separate syringe for one vaccine.
 If more than one injection has to be given in one limb then ensure that the distance 
between the two injection sites is at least 1 inch apart.
3. What are the upper age limits for various vaccines?
 According to National Immunization Schedule, some vaccines have an upper age limit 
for administration and these vaccines should not be administered once that age limit 
is crossed. The vaccines should not be administered once that age limit is crossed. The 
vaccines should be given to the following ages as per UIP guidelines:
•	BCG: up to one year of age for childhood vaccination
•	Hepatitis B (Birth dose): till 24 hours of birth
•	bOPV-0: till 15 days of birth
•	bOPV: upto five years of age 
•	IPV: Till 1 year of age
•	Pentavalent: Till 1 year of age
•	RVV: Till 1 year of age
•	PCV: Till 1 year of age
•	MR: up to five years in UIP and in MR campaigns, the vaccine is given upto 15 years age 
group
•	DPT: up to 7 years, beyond this age administer the Td vaccine
•	JE (both live & killed): up to 2 years
 Only the above-mentioned vaccines have upper age limits for starting the first dose. 
Efforts should be made to ensure that all vaccines are given at the recommended ages, or 
closer to it.
 For Pentavalent, IPV and PCV, if at least one dose is given before one year of age, then 
remaining doses can be administered, and the schedule must be completed at the earliest.
 If the first dose is not administered before one year of age, then these vaccines cannot be 
administered to the child under UIP.
4. If a child who has never been vaccinated is brought in after completing 12 months of 
age, (beyond one year) what vaccines would you give?
 While vaccinating this child, keep the aforementioned upper age limits for each vaccine in 
mind.
 This child should be administered DPT 1, bOPV 1, MR-1, JE-1 (if applicable) and also 
Vitamin A solution. The subsequent doses of DPT (2 and 3), bOPV (2and 3), MR-2, and 
JE-2 should be given at an interval of 4 weeks. Give booster dose of bOPV and DPT at a 
minimum of 6 months after administering bOPV 3/DPT 3.FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

195As per the national immunization schedule this child need not be given – BCG, Rotavirus, 
Penta and IPV, PCV.
5. Which vaccines can be given to a child between 1 and 5 years of age who has never 
been vaccinated?
 This child should be administered 3 doses of DPT, 3 doses of bOPV,  2 doses of MR and 2 
doses of JE (where applicable) and 2ml of Vitamin A solution. These doses should be given 
at an interval of 4 weeks. Such a child will not receive BCG, Hepatitis B, Rotavirus, Penta, 
PCV and IPV. 
 Give booster dose of bOPV/DPT at a minimum of 6 months after administering bOPV 3/
DPT 3.  
 *Note: If an unvaccinated child is more than 16 months of age remember the interval between MR 1 and MR 2 
is 4 weeks and for JE 1 and JE 2 (where applicable) the interval is also 4 weeks.
6. Which vaccines can be given to a child between 5 and 7 years of age who has never 
been vaccinated?
 Give of DPT 1, 2 and 3 at 4 weeks intervals. Give booster dose of DPT at a minimum of 6 
months after administering DPT 3 up to the age of 7 years.
 In case the child is near to the 7th year, start with DPT. Once this child crosses 7 years, Td 
vaccine should be used in place of DPT for the remaining doses. Thereafter, this child 
continues to receive the Td vaccine at 10 years and 16 years as per the NIS.
7. Why are the DPT, Hep B (birth dose), IPV and Pentavalent vaccines given in the 
anterolateral mid-thigh and not the gluteal region (buttocks)?
 The gluteal muscles are not well developed in less than one year of age. Therefore, giving 
injection in the gluteal region can damage the sciatic nerve. Moreover, vaccine deposited 
in the fat of the gluteal region does not invoke the appropriate immune response.
Vaccine-specific FAQs2
BCG
1. Why is BCG given only up to 1 year age of the child in UIP?
 Most children acquire natural clinical/sub-clinical tuberculosis infection by the age 
of 1 year. This protects them against severe forms of childhood tuberculosis, e.g., TB 
meningitis and miliary disease. Hence as per the current NIS, BCG is given only up to 1 
year of age of child. Any change in the schedule shall be intimated appropriately by a 
Government Order.
2. If no scar appears after administering BCG, should one re-vaccinate the child?
 There is no need to re-vaccinate the child even if there is no scar.
3. Why do we give 0.05 ml dose of BCG to newborns (below 1 month of age)?
 Dose of 0.05 ml is sufficient to elicit adequate protection in newborn under 1 month of 
age.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

196Hepatitis B
4. What is the “birth dose” of hepatitis B?
 This refers to the dose given within 24 hours of birth. A child vaccinated with Hep B after 
more than 24 hours of birth is not considered to have received the birth dose.
5. Why is the birth dose of the Hepatitis B vaccine given only within 24 hours of birth?
 The birth dose of the Hepatitis B vaccine is effective in preventing perinatal transmission 
of hepatitis B only if given within the first 24 hours.
6. Why is Hepatitis B vaccine in combination with Pentavalent vaccine given only till 1 
year of age?
 Hepatitis B in combination with Pentavalent vaccine if given after 6 weeks and upto 1 
year of age because infections during the first year of age have a 90% chance of becoming 
chronic as compared to 30% during 1–5 years and 6% after 5 years. Persons with chronic 
infection have 15–25% risk of dying prematurely due to HBV- related liver cirrhosis and 
cancer.
Pentavalent Vaccine
1. What is Pentavalent vaccine?
 Pentavalent vaccine is a vaccine that contains five antigens (Diphtheria + Pertussis + 
Tetanus+ Hepatitis B + Haemophilus influenzae type b).
2. How is Pentavalent vaccine more advantageous?
• The addition of Hib vaccine provides protection against Haemophilus Influenzae  
type b related diseases (bacterial meningitis, pneumonia and others)
• The benefit of the Hepatitis B combination in Pentavalent is explained as below
•  Operationally, the Pentavalent vaccine per se shall reduce injection load from 9 
(3 for DPT, 3 for Hep B & 3 for Hib) to 3 (reduction of 6 injections). However, other 
vaccines will be given as per the NIS and their injection load is not affected
• With introduction of Pentavalent, 1 antigen was added, while number of injections 
reduced to 3
3. What is the schedule for Pentavalent vaccine?
 As per the National Immunization Schedule, three doses of Pentavalent vaccine are to  
be administered. The first dose is given only after a child is 6 weeks old. The second and 
third doses are given at 10 and 14 weeks of age, respectively. There is no booster dose 
recommended under UIP.
4. For what reasons should a child not be given Pentavalent vaccine?
• A child below 6 weeks of age should not be given the Pentavalent vaccine
• Severe allergic reactions – although serious side effects have not been reported, a 
child who has had a severe reaction to the Pentavalent vaccine earlier should not be 
given another dose
• Children with moderate or severe acute illness should not be administered a 
Pentavalent vaccine until their condition improves. Minor illnesses, however, such as 
upper respiratory infections (URI) are not a contraindication to vaccinationFREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

1975. What vaccine will be given to a child who has received at least one dose of Pentavalent 
vaccine before his/her first birthday? 
 If a child has received at least one dose of Pentavalent vaccine before his/her first  
birthday, the child should be administered the due Pentavalent doses at a minimum 
interval of 4 weeks, at the earliest available opportunity.
6. What are the common side-effects of Pentavalent vaccine?
 Pentavalent vaccine has not been associated with any serious side effects. However, 
redness, swelling and pain may occur at the site where the injection was given. These 
symptoms may appear the day after the injection is given and last from 1 to 3 days. Less 
commonly, children may develop a fever for a short time after immunization. The child 
should be given syrup Paracetamol (125 mg per 5ml) to relieve pain.
7. Why is the Haemophilus Influenzae Type b (Hib) vaccine in combination with 
Pentavalent vaccine given only till 1 year of age?
 Hib B is one of the leading causes of meningitis and pneumonia in children aged less  
than 5 years. Hib most commonly occurs in less than 5 years (4mths-18mths are at the 
highest risk). It is important to prevent disease and immunize very early in life. Beyond 
1 year, the child is assumed to have been affected with natural infection, hence the 
vaccination shall have no role. 
Rotavirus vaccine
1. How effective is the Rotavirus vaccine?
 Sanitation and hygiene improvements have less impact on the transmission of Rotavirus 
diarrhea which is thought to be due to person-to-person contact. The only specific 
intervention strategy is immunization.
 
 The available Rotavirus Vaccines are observed to be effective in preventing severe rotavirus 
diarrhoea by 54-60%. The protective effect of the Rotavirus vaccine lasts through 2nd year 
of life.
2. Will vaccination with Rotavirus vaccine prevent all diarrheas?
 No, it does not prevent all diarrheas. Diarrhea is caused by many organisms of which 
Rotavirus is one of the leading causes for diarrhoea in children. Rotavirus vaccine is 
effective in preventing diarrhoea due to Rotavirus only. So, the child may still get diarrhea 
due to other    germs and causes even after receiving Rotavirus vaccine.
 The Rotavirus vaccine along with other interventions for prevention and management  
of diarrhea including exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months and continued breastfeeding 
with appropriate complementary feeding, vitamin A supplementation in children 
9-59 months, early detection and appropriate case management of diarrhea with oral 
rehydration solution (ORS) and zinc (for 14 days), access to safe drinking Water, Sanitation 
and Hygiene interventions (WASH), will help in reducing under-five mortality due to 
diarrhea.
3. What should be done if a child has received one or two doses of Rotavirus vaccine in 
a private facility?
 If the parents want to vaccinate their child from the public sector after receiving one or 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

198two doses of Rotavirus vaccine in a private facility, the remaining doses may be provided 
as per the NIS. Under the UIP, interchangeability between different Rotavirus vaccines is 
permitted. 
4. What If the child spits out the Rotavirus vaccine or vomits immediately after having 
it?
 Repeat the dose (2ml). In case an incomplete dose is administered (the infant spits out or 
regurgitates most of the vaccine), repeat the dose in the same vaccination visit. To prevent 
spitting, please position the tip (nozzle) of the 3ml oral syringe towards the inner cheek 
(buccal cavity). Administer the vaccine slowly. Avoid administering the vaccine over the 
tongue. It should also be ensured that the tip of the syringe (nozzle) is not touched with 
finger before administration.
Inactivated Poliovirus vaccine
1. What is IPV?
 IPV refers to Inactivated Poliovirus Vaccine administered by injection and it contains all 
3 types of polioviruses. Evidence suggests that IPV vaccine, when used along with bOPV 
(which contains only Type 1 and Type 3 live attenuated vaccine viruses), increases the 
protection of the individual as well as the community. IPV together with OPV prevents 
re-emergence and reinfection of wild poliovirus (WPV). Trivalent OPV (tOPV) has been 
withdrawn globally in 2016 from all countries and only bOPV is in use in its place.
2. Will IPV (injection) replace OPV (drops)?
 No, IPV (injection) will not replace bOPV (polio drops), since IPV is recommended to be 
administered in addition to bOPV.
3. What is the benefit of IPV?
 IPV is the only available vaccine which gives protection against Polio virus type 2 apart 
from Polio virus type 1 and 3. It provides much-needed additional protection against 
polio and protects a child as well as other children in our community. Evidence shows 
that when IPV is used along with bOPV, it builds better mucosal (intestinal) immunity 
than when bOPV is used alone; it thereby increases both the protection of the individual 
and the community. To maximize childhood immunity and move towards global polio 
eradication, it is recommended that both vaccines be used together.
4. Is IPV safe?
 Yes, IPV is considered very safe, whether given alone or in combination with other vaccines.
5. Are there any contraindications for use of IPV?
 IPV should not be administered to children with a documented or known allergy to the 
following antibiotics - streptomycin, neomycin or polymyxin B, or with a history of a 
previous allergic reaction after IPV injection.
6. Is it safe to give IPV and bOPV together?
 Yes, it is absolutely safe to give IPV and bOPV together. It is also important – and best – for 
a child to receive both IPV and OPV. Together, these two vaccines provide safe and strong 
protection against polio. If a child only receives one of the vaccines they will not be as 
well protected as the child that has received both the vaccines. Primary doses of bOPV 
(bOPV1, and bOPV 3) should be completed as per schedule.FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

1997. How and when is IPV to be administered?
 fIPV is to be given as a fractional dose (0.1 ml) intradermally in the Right arm of the child.
 Fractional IPV (fIPV) is given in 3 doses at 6 and 14 weeks along with bOPV 1 and bOPV 3 
and third dose of fIPV is to be given at 9-11 months on Left upper arm.
Measles and Rubella vaccine
1. Does a child need to be vaccinated if she or he has history of any fever-rash illness 
including measles or rubella disease?
 Yes. There are multiple causes of fever rash like illness. Therefore, every child must be 
vaccinated with two doses of MR vaccine, as per the national immunization schedule at 
the recommended ages, irrespective of any past fever-rash illness.
2. If a child has received the Measles-Rubella (MR) vaccine before 9 months of age, is it 
necessary to repeat the vaccine later?
 If it is given before 9 months, it has to be repeated as per the National Immunization 
Schedule, i.e after the completion of 9 months until 11 months of age as 1st dose and at 
16-23 months as 2nd dose in RI.
3. If a child comes after 2 years for the first dose of MR vaccine, then can he/she get the 
second dose?
 All efforts should be made to immunize all children at the right age i.e. the first dose at 
completed 9 months to 11 months and the second dose at 16-24 months. However, if a 
child has missed one dose or both the doses, these need to be given to the child up to the 
age of 5 years at one month interval.
4. If a child has received all vaccines as per the national immunization schedule, does 
she or he need to be vaccinated during supplementary MR campaigns?
 Yes, in addition to the recommended national immunization schedule the child (if eligible 
as per age group targeted) must be vaccinated with supplementary MR vaccines during 
campaigns.
5. As MR and JE vaccine doses are recommended for the same age group, can they be 
given together?
 Yes, two live injectable vaccines can be administered simultaneously at different sites, 
otherwise at a minimum interval of 28 days.
Japanese Encephalitis
1. What is the schedule of JE vaccine in the UIP?
 Indigenously manufactured killed JE vaccines are being used under the NIS.  And as per 
the interim recommendation from the NTAGI, JE vaccines from various manufacturers 
are programmatically interchanged.
 Two doses of JE vaccine are administered in UIP in all JE endemic districts of the country. 
The first dose of JE vaccine is given to infants aged 9–11months along with the first dose 
of MR vaccine and the second dose is given along with DPT booster dose and MR vaccine 
second dose.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

2002. If a child more than 9 months but less than 24 months who has never received any JE 
vaccine comes for immunization, how should JE vaccine be administered?
 The first dose should be given at first contact and the second dose should be given at an 
interval of 1month following the first dose. Remember, that the upper age limit for JE 
vaccine is 2 years.
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV)
1. What should be done if a PCV dose is delayed?
 The two primary doses and one booster dose of PCV should be given during the first year 
of life. If the doses are delayed within the first year, Doses (both primary and booster) 
must be separated by a minimum interval of at least 2 months, to be given at the next 
scheduled immunization visit. In delayed cases beyond 1 year of age, due doses can be 
given to a child only if a child has received at least one dose of PCV before his/her first 
birthday. For those with at least one previous PCV dose, the series should be completed 
at the earliest available opportunity.
 Common health care provider and parent/caregiver questions about multiple injections 
2. Will my child experience more pain or discomfort during vaccination when there are 
multiple injections?
 Children may experience slightly more pain or discomfort when there are multiple 
injections. However, you should remind parents the pain or discomfort from vaccination 
is very brief – and that even one injection can cause pain or discomfort, with children 
often not noticing the pain or discomfort caused by subsequent injections.
 If more immunization visits are used to provide children with need vaccinations that 
means there will be more times when children will experience pain or discomfort from 
vaccinations. 
• Confidence in vaccine effectiveness, such as “Will the vaccines be as effective as if 
given alone?” 
• Concern about adverse events, such as “Is there a greater likelihood of a child 
experiencing an adverse event?” 
 
 It is important to remember that giving all the eligible vaccines during the visit is essential. 
It is safe to give multiple injections and you should inform the parents of the safety and 
importance to vaccinate fully. Parents and caregivers will be willing to have their children 
receive multiple injections during the same visit if you answer their questions and 
concerns about the safety and effectiveness of multiple vaccinations.
3. How can you decrease or minimize the pain from multiple vaccine injections?
 There are things that you can do when providing multiple injections to minimize pain. 
Pain during immunization can be decreased by: 
1. Properly restraining the child in cuddle, or straddle position, sudden and unexpected 
movements can be prevented.
2. Stroking the skin or applying pressure close to the injection site before and during 
injection.
3. Injecting the least painful vaccine first when two vaccines are being administered 
sequentially during a single office visit.
4. Performing a rapid intramuscular injection without aspiration. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

2014. Is it safe for children to receive two or three injections of vaccines at one time?
 Yes. Children are given vaccines at a young age because this is when they are most 
vulnerable to polio, diphtheria, whooping cough (pertussis), Hib and pneumococcal 
disease. Vaccination schedules that involve multiple vaccine injections during the same 
visit are based on many years of safety and effectiveness information. An infant’s immune 
system is more than ready to respond to the very small number of weakened and killed 
antigens (bacteria and viruses) in vaccines. However, these same children, if exposed to 
a disease without having been vaccinated, an infant’s immune system may not be strong 
enough to fight the disease.
5. Is it safe for children to receive three vaccine injections at one time?
 Yes. An infant’s immune system is more than ready to respond to the very small number 
of weakened and killed antigens (bacteria and viruses) in vaccines. From the time they are 
born, babies are exposed to thousands of germs and other antigens in the environment 
and their immune systems are readily able to respond to these large numbers of antigenic 
stimuli.
6. Is there any evidence that some multiple injections of vaccines may increase the risk 
for adverse events?
 In most cases, multiple injections carry no greater risk for adverse events. However, these 
risks must be balanced against the risk of disease if one of the vaccinations is not given.
Tetanus and adult Diphtheria (Td) vaccine
1. What is Td vaccine?
 Tetanus and adult diphtheria (Td) vaccine is a combination of tetanus and diphtheria 
with lower concentration of Diphtheria antigen (d) as recommended for older children 
and adults.
2. Why Td vaccine needed for pregnant women?
 The use of Td is recommended during pregnancy to protect against maternal and 
neonatal tetanus & Diphtheria during prenatal care. Vaccination during pregnancy also 
serves to boost immunity and increase the duration of protection in those pregnant 
women who had not received the full set of recommended booster doses. Td also boost 
decreasing diphtheria immunity in addition to assuring tetanus protection and help to 
curtail diphtheria outbreaks.
3. What is the sensitivity, storage procedure & handling process, wastage rate for Td 
vaccine?
• Td is a freeze sensitive vaccine. No reconstitution required for Td vaccine
• Td vaccine to be stored between +2 to +8 degree Celsius in ILR 
• Shake test is applicable to Td vaccine, to check freezing of Td vaccine. If you find any 
frozen vial of Td vaccine in ILR, do not use the vial.
• The wastage rate for Td vaccine is 10 %.
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

202

203References

204

2051. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India Immunization Handbook for 
Health Workers 2018.
2. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Intensified Mission 
Indradhanush 4.0. Operational Guidelines 2022. 
3. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Immunization handbook for 
medical officers. Reprint 2017. 
4. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Field Guide Surveillance of 
Acute Flaccid Paralysis, 3rd edition, September 2005. 
5. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Measles Rubella surveillance 
field guide 2020.
6. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Surveillance for Diphtheria, 
Pertussis and Neonatal Tetanus, India Field Guide, 1st Edition 2020.
7. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Government of India. Handbook for Vaccine & Cold-
chain Handlers 2nd edition India 2016.
8. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Guideline on Open Vial Policy 
for using multi-dose vials in Universal Immunization Program with inclusion of RVV, letter 
dated 22 March 2023.
9. Immunization Division, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Birth 
dose vaccination protocol, letter dated 16 October 2019. 
10. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Guidance Document 
on Strategic Approach for Reaching Zero Dose Children in India. India’s Zero Dose 
Implementation Plan. 2024.
11. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Programme. Available at: https://idsp.mohfw.gov.in/
12. Child Health Division. Department of Family Welfare Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
New Delhi. Field Guide. Surveillance of Acute Flaccid Paralysis. Third edition. 2005. 
13. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Measles and Rubella 
Surveillance Field Guide 2020. 2020.
14. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. Surveillance of Diphtheria, 
Pertussis and Neonatal Tetanus, Field Guide, India. First Edition. 2020.
15. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. National Viral Hepatitis 
Control Program. Operational Guidelines. 2018
16. World Health Organization (WHO) Immunization in Practice. A practical guide for health 
staff. WHO; 2015. 
17. World Health Organization. Microplanning for immunization service delivery using the 
Reaching Every District (RED) strategy [Internet]. WHO; 2009. Available from: https://
www.who.int/publications/i/item/microplanning-for-immunization-service-delivery-
using-the-reaching-every-district-(-red)-strategy
18. Immunization Division, Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. 
Handbook for Vaccine & Cold-chain Handlers. 2nd Edition. 2016.
19. Government of India Ministry of Health & Family Welfare Immunization Division. 
Guideline on Open Vial Policy for using multi-dose vials in Universal Immunisation 
Program with inclusion of RVV, 22 March 2023References
REFERENCES

20620. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Covid 19 vaccine operational 
guidelines, 20th December 2020.
21. Guidelines on Management of Biomedical Waste under Universal lmmunization Program 
(As Per Guidance Document issued by MoH&FW), Central Pollution Control Board, 2021
22. Government of India Ministry of Health & Family Welfare Immunization Division. Birth 
dose protocol. 16 October 2019.
23. Ministry of Health and Family welfare, Government of India. AEFI Adverse Event Following 
Immunization Surveillance and Response. Operational Guidelines. 2024.
24. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Guidelines on use of Syrup 
Paracetamol Following Vaccinations, 2020. 
25. Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. Operational Guidelines, Initial 
management of Anaphylaxis using Injection Adrenaline by ANMs, 2018.   
26. World Health Organization, WHO Position paper Recommendations for Routine 
Immunization, March 2023.REFERENCES

207Annexures

208

209Annexures
ANNEXURESAnnexure 1. National Immunization schedule beneficiary vaccine chart
National Immunization Schedule
1 January 2023 On wardsTdTd 1, T d 2 or 
Td Booster
Pregnan t Women 16 years 10 years 5-6 y ears 16-24 mon ths 9-12 mon ths 14 weeks 10 weeks 6 weeks At BirthTd
16-24 mon ths 9-12 mon ths
in selected states/districts*OPV-Z ero
BCG
Hep B Birth 
DoseOPV-I
RVV-I
fIPV-I
Pentavalen t-1
PCV-IOPV-3
RVV-3
fIPV-2
Pentavalen t-3
PCV-2MR-I
fIPV-3
PCV-Booster
JE-I*OPV-Booster
MR-2
DPT-Booster-1
JE-2DPT-Booster-2TdTd
OPV-2
RVV-2
Pentavalen t-2


210ANNEXURES
2. Routine Immunization microplanning formats-Head count survey formats, Subcenter/ ANM area microplan formats, 
PHC/ UPHC microplan formats
Form SC-1
District/ Corporation:_____________________  Block/urban area:________________________  PHC/ UPHC:______________________________  Sub center/ ANM area:_______________________________
Number 
of new 
born 
(birth upto 
1 month) Number 
of of 
Infants 
b/w 1 
month to 
1 year Total 
children 
below 1 
year    
(K+L)Number of 
children 2 
to 5 yearsNumber of children 
2 to 5 years - 
missed doses 
(MR-1/ MR-2 doses/ 
OPV/DPT/ booster 
doses)
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
Y / N
TOTAL TOTAL
Signature of ANM_______________________ Signature of Supervisor:_____________________ Signature of Medical Oﬃcer:_____________________
# Type of HRA code: Migratory HRA: 1 = Slums with migration; 2 = Nomads; 3 - Brick kiln; 4 - Construction site; 5 - Other migratory high-risk areas (ﬁshermen villages, riverine areas with shifting populations, migrants in tea/coﬀee estates etc); Non-Migratory (Settled) HRA:  
6A- Settled Slums (notiﬁed & non-notiﬁed); 6B- Hard to Reach Area; 6C- Areas under Vacant / temporarily vacant (More than 3 months) sub centres;  6D- Areas with Measles/Rubella outbreaks or cases of Diphtheria, Pertussis, Neonatal tetanus in last 3 years; 6E-Areas with 
vaccine hesitancy/ refusal; 6F-Other settled high-risk areas. ANM Name with Ph no.:_____________________________________________;  No. of ASHAs working in Subcenter/ ANM area:___________;       Medical oﬀcier's naame with ph no.:_______________________________________
Number of children below 1 year Total 
PopulationTotal 
Pregnant 
WomenNumber 
of 
children 1 
to 2 yr of 
age Children 2 to 5 yearsName and 
contact number 
of person doing 
surveyDesignation 
of Surveyor 
(ASHA/ AWW/ 
Link worker/ 
Other)Dates of 
Survey 
From / To FILL AFTER Survey - FOR ANM USE ONLY HRA 
code 
(if 
HRA)SUB CENTER / ANM AREA MASTER LIST and Head COUNT SURVEY PLANNING FORM
Sl.
No   Name of Villages / Hamlets / 
Tolas / Ward / Mohalla / 
HRAs              Estimated 
no. of 
households 
in the area        High 
Risk 
Area#Name of ASHA 
/ AWW / 
Mobilizer 
designated for 
this areaName & contact 
number of local 
inﬂuencerAnnexure 2.1

211
ANNEXURESAnnexure 2.2
Village A Village AForm SC-2
Sub-centre Map showing Sub-Centers/ANM area, Session sites, AVD, High Risk areas &  AEFI management center
Religious place
AEFI management centre 
HRAs      Sub centre / ANM area map 
District/ Corporation: _______________________ Block/Urban area: ____________________  PHC/ UPHC: ______________________  Sub-centre/ANM area:_____________________
LEGEND
PHC/UPHC
SUB CENTRE
VILLAGES HQ
ROAD
RAILWAY LINE
RIVER
Signature of ANM                                                                               Signature of MOLAKE / POND
RI session site
Private RI Session
School 
OTHERS
RI
P
S
1-5 & 6A-6FP

212Form SC-3
Pregnant Woman
HH no.     
(as per 
chullah)Name of head of family Name of Husband (for PW) / 
Father (for child) / Gaurdian Contact NumberTotal number of  
family members 
living in this 
household? (Include 
All adults & children 
including new borns)No. of Pregnant 
Woman                                         
(if present mention 
details in form SC-
4A) No. of children 
aged less than 1 
month  
(if present mention 
details in form SC-
4B)     No. of children 
aged between
1 month upto 1 
year 
(if present mention 
details in form SC-
4B) No. of children 
aged between 
1  to 2 Years 
 (if present 
mention details in 
form SC-4B) No. of children
aged between 
2 to 5 Years No. of children  
2 to 5 Years 
 MISSED MR-1/ MR-2  
dose /DPT/ OPV/ 
boosters  
(if present mention details 
in form SC-4C) 
A B C D E F G H I J K
Total 
housesTotal
Signature of ASHA / AWW / Surveyor:______________________ Veriﬁed by  ASHA Facilitator (Signature):___________________ Veriﬁed by ANM (Signature):________________
SHEET NUMBER :________Family Details Children 0 to 2 years                                                              Children 2 to 5 years House to House Survey form
Date of Visit : ___  /____  /____ 
First house visited today - House No. :_________ Last house visited today  - House No. :________
Name: ___________________           Address with landmark:__________________________ Name: ______________________          Address with landmark:______________________ ASHA/ AWW/ Surveyor Name and Ph No.: _______________________; _________________________   ASHA facilitator's name and ph No.:________________________________________District/ Corporation::____________________              Block/urban area:_________________________________     PHC/ UPHC:___________________________________   Sub center/ ANM area:__________________________
Village/Urban area/Ward (as per form SC-1):______________________________________________    ANM name and phone no.:______________________________Supervisor's name and phone no.:_________________________Annexure 2.3ANNEXURES

213Annexure 2.4
Td-1                                                                Td-2                                                  Td-Booster                                                
(If 2 doses of 
Td given within 
3 years of the 
current 
pregnancy)1st 
ANC2nd 
ANC3rd 
ANC4th 
ANCTd 
due - 
Y/NANC 
due - 
Y/N
A B D F G
Date/Y/N Date/Y/N Date/Y/N DateDateDateDate
TOTAL 
PW TOTAL
Signature of ASHA/AWW/ Link worker/ Other surveyor _____________ Veriﬁed by  ASHA Facilitator (Signature):___________CHead Count Survey of Pregnant Women Form SC-4A
EDistrict/ Corporation::_________________________      Block/Urban area:____________________  Sub Centre/ANM area________________________   Village/Urban area/Ward:_______________________________
Name of ASHA/AWW/ surveyor with ph.no.: __________________________  Name of ANM:_______________________  Area Name and No as per Form SC-1:   ______________________   Date of Visit : __ 
/__/__
HH no.     
(as per 
form 
SC 3)MCP card 
number/ 
UWIN ref 
ID Year of 
birthName of the pregnant 
womanAge in 
years  Husband's name Mobile Number                                 
Veriﬁed by  ANM (Signature):___________Expected 
date of 
delivery / 
LMPTd Vaccination Ante Natal Check Up For ANM 
only 
H I J
ANNEXURES

214Annexure 2.5
Form SC-4B
bOPV-
Birth 
dose  BCG                          Hepatitis 
B Birth 
dose                     bOPV1
RVV1
f IPV1
PCV 1
Penta-1
bOPV 2
RVV 2
Penta 2
bOPV 3
RVV 3
fIPV 2
PCV 2
Penta 3
fIPV3
MR 1
PCV Booster
JE 1 (elligible dists)
Vitamin A 1
bOPV Booster
MR 2
DPT Booster 1
JE 2 (elligible dists)
Vitamin A 2
A B C D E G M O
 Y/N  Y/N
Name of ASHA/AWW/ Surveyor: _____________ Veriﬁed by  ASHA Facilitator (Signature):___________District/Corporation:______________________      Block/Urban area:______________________  Sub Centre/ANM area____________________________   Village/Urban area/Ward:_____________________________________
Name of ASHA/AWW/ surveyor with ph.no: _______________________________________________________________    Name of ANM:___________________________________________  Area Name and No as per Form SC-1:   ____________________________________  Date of Visit : __/__/__
__ /__ /__ M / FChild is 
Fully 
immuni
zed (FIC 
Plus)Booster and 2nd doses of vaccines at 16 
to 23 months of age
Child is 
completely 
immunized 
Date / Y/NN
__ /__ /__ M / F__ /__ /__ M / F__ /__ /__ M / F__ /__ /__ M / F__ /__ /__ M / F__ /__ /__ M / F__ /__ /__ M / FDate / Y/N
M / FVaccines at 10 
weeks  Vaccines at 14 weeks 
K
Date / Y/N Date / Y/N Date / Y/NVaccines at 9 to 11 months of age 
J L
Date / Y/NHead count survey of Children (0-2 years)
Veriﬁed by  ANM (Signature):___________House No 
as in 
Form 3  Name of the child  Date of Birth 
dd/mm/yyAge in  
months 
(completed)   Gender:       
M / F Name of the mother/ father/ 
Gaurdian with mobile 
number                          MCP card  
number/  
UWIN ref IDVaccines at birth                            Vaccines at 6 weeks  
F H I
__ /__ /__ M / F
__ /__ /__ANNEXURES

215Annexure 2.6
Form SC-4C
1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
A B C D E G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z AA
Total 
children 
missed
Name of ASHA/AWW/ Surveyor: ____________________ Veriﬁed by  ASHA Facilitator (Signature): _______________________District/ Corporation::__________________________   Block/Urban area:______________________    Sub Centre/ANM area_______________________________      Village/Urban area/Ward:_____________________________________________________
Name of ASHA/AWW/ surveyor with ph.no.: ____________________________________________________________  Name of ANM:______________________________________ Area Name and No as per Form SC- 1: 
______________________________________________Date of Visit : __ /__ /__Enlistment and tracking of children between 2-5 years missed for MR/DPT/OPV/ booster doses
Note: This format is used to document and track children between 2-5 years missed for MR/DPT/ Penta/OPV doses. If missed child/ children found, then encircle "Y" and mobilize the child to RI session. After vaccination, the date of vaccination of the missed dose/s are to be updated in the 
columns (R to AA) as per vaccine dose received. __ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__MR
__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
Veriﬁed by Supervisor (Signature): ___________________________________ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
Veriﬁed by  ANM (Signature): Date of vaccination 
(to be ﬁlled after vaccination)
MR-1 MR-2OPV DPT OPV 
boosterDPT-1 
booster
__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__ __ /__ /__ __ /__ /__
Y/NY/N__ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /____ /__ /__
M / F __ /__ /____ /__ /__
__ /__ /__
__ /__ /__
__ /__ /__
__ /__ /____ /__ /__ M / F 
M / F M / F F
M / F 
M / F 
Y/NY/NM / F 
M / F M / F 
M / F House 
No as in 
Form 3  Name of the child  Date of Birth 
dd/mm/yyAge in years 
and months 
(completed)   Gender:          
M / F Name of the father and 
mobile number                         MCP card/ 
UWIN ref ID Missed vaccine dose/s
(Encircle Y/N)
OPV DPT/ Penta DPT-1 
boosterOPV 
booster
__ /__ /__
Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N __ /__ /__Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N
Y/N __ /__ /__Y/N __ /__ /__
__ /__ /__
Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N __ /__ /__Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N __ /__ /__
Y/N
Y/N
__ /__ /__
Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N __ /__ /__Y/NY/N
Y/NY/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N
Y/N Y/N
Y/N __ /__ /____ /__ /__
Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N __ /__ /__Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N
Y/N Y/N
No. of children missed for MR, OPV, DPT/ 
Penta vaccinesY/N
Y/NY/N Y/N Y/N Y/N
Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/N Y/NY/N
ANNEXURES

216Annexure 2.7
Block / Urban : _______________ PHC / UPHC Planning Unit: __________________ Name of Sub-Centre / ANM area: __________________________________ Name of Session Site : ________________________________
Name and Ph no of ASHA:_____________________________________________________ Name and Ph no of AWW / Mobilizer:______________________________ Name and Ph no of Inﬂuencer:_________________________
Name and Ph no of ANM :_____________________________________________________ Date of Session: ______________________________ Date of next session at this site: _______________________
Sl. 
No.MCP Card No. Name of Child / Pregnant WomanDate of Birth 
(for Child) / 
Expected 
date of 
Delivery 
(for PW)Age in years 
and months 
(completed)Gender               
(M / F)Vaccines due in this 
session 
(mention name of 
ALL due vaccines)Did the 
pregnant 
woman / child 
arrive today? 
(Yes / No)If not 
vaccinated 
then reason
(R1/R2/R3/R
4/R5/R6)When to 
come for  
next 
vaccination?
(date)What vaccines 
is/are due next 
session? *Incentive money 
Rs. 100/- payable to 
ASHA for Full 
Immunization
(Yes / No)**Incentive money 
Rs. 75/-  payable to 
ASHA for Complete 
Immunization 
(Yes / No)**Incentive money 
Rs. 50/-  payable to 
ASHA for DPT-2 
booster
(Yes / No)
A B C D E F H I K L M N O P
Reason - R4: Vaccinated 
outsideR5: AEFI 
ApprehensionR6: Other
Number - 
Signature of ASHA:______________________________________ Signature of AWW: __________________________________Details of Pregnant Women / Children upto 5 years due for vaccination for RI session After the RI session
Name of Father / Mother/ Husband 
with contact numberIf yes, vaccines 
administered today 
to pregnant woman / 
child 
G J
2__/__ /__1__/__ /__
Y / N__/__ /__Y / N__/__ /__
4__/__ /__3__/__ /__
Y / N__/__ /__Y / N__/__ /__
6__/__ /__Y / N__/__ /__5__/__ /__
__/__ /__Y / N__/__ /__
__/__ /__8__/__ /__  Y / N__/__ /__7
__/__ /__Y / N
__/__ /__10__/__ /__Y / N__/__ /__9
Have these beneﬁciaries been included in 
the due list of next session?Y/N Y/NR1: Out of Village/ 
House lockedReason for beneﬁciaries who did not attend 
this sessionY / N
Total amount payable
Y/N Y/NForm SC-5RI SESSION DUE LIST  (for ASHAs/ mobilizers)
(Prepared by ANM)
Signature of ANM:__________________________________Tracking of missed beneﬁciaries of the RI session Vaccination coverage of due beneﬁciaries
Total Number of Pregnant women as per the due list
Total Preganant women  vaccinated
Y/N Y/N Y/NTotal number of children as per due list
Total children vaccinatedR2: Sick R3: RefusedANNEXURES

217Annexure 2.8
Form SC-6
District/ Corporation:  ____________________ Block / Urban: ______________ PHC / UPHC: _____________________________
Name of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: ______________ Mobile no.: _______________ Name of IO / ICC: _________________________
Name of ANM: __________________________ Mobile no.: _______________ Name & Designation of Supervisor: _________________
PW Infants PW Infants
F G
(D/12)(E/12)
Signature of ANM:__________________________________ Signature of Supervisor:__________________________________J K L MSubcenter / ANM Area: RI Sessions plan 
S.NoName of Villages / Wards / 
Mohallas / Hamlets / Tolas / HRAs#  
(From form SC-1)     
New areas /identiﬁed missed areas 
should be entered marking with 
asterisk(*) Total 
Population         
of Area 
(Total of form 3 
Column E)Beneﬁciary Targets
Monthly 
Injection 
Load ₤Number of 
Sessions $Name and location of the Session 
site / sitesName of the mobilizer with 
designation and mob.no.Type of area / 
terrain - plain 
/ hilly / 
riverine/ 
tribal area(MO IC to ensure this format is ﬁlled for all sub-centres/ ANM areas, including vacant sub-centres/ANM area)
$ Less than 25 injections: One session every alternate month;  26-50 injections:  one session per month;  more than 50 injections:  two  sessions per month as per need; more than 100 injections: daily sessions. For hard to reach areas or less than 1000 population, where not tagged, plan 
for sessions every quarter for a minimum of 4 sessions a year ; for PHC/CHC/RH:  plan daily sessions.                         SC / ANM area: _________________________
                         Mobile no.: _____________________________
                         Mobile no.: _____________________________
Type of Session - 
Fixed / outreach/ 
mobile Annual Target 
(PW = Actual Head 
count X2 , Infants 
=Actual Head 
count)Monthly Target 
# Type of HRA code: Migratory HRA: 1 = Slums with migration; 2 = Nomads; 3 - Brick kiln; 4 - Construction site; 5 - Other migratory high-risk areas (ﬁshermen villages, riverine areas with shifting populations, migrants in tea/coﬀee estates etc); Non-Migratory (Settled) HRA:  6A- Settled 
Slums (notiﬁed & non-notiﬁed); 6B- Hard to Reach Area; 6C- Areas under Vacant / temporarily vacant (More than 3 months) sub centres;  6D- Areas with Measles/Rubella outbreaks or cases of Diphtheria, Pertussis, Neonatal tetanus in last 3 years; 6E-Areas with vaccine hesitancy/ 
refusal; 6F-Other settled high-risk areas
₤ Injection load for children-in non JE districts= {14 injections x monthly infant target (Col G); in JE districts= 16 injections x monthly infant target (Col G)} 
   For Pregnant woment: 2 injections x monthly PW target (Col D); Add Td 10 and Td 16 if being given at outreach RI session sitesA B C D E H I
ANNEXURES

218Annexure 2.9ANNEXURES
Form SC-7
District/ Corporation:  ____________________________________ Block/ Urban: _________________________________________ PHC/ UPHC: ______________________________________________________________ SC / ANM area: _____________________________
Name of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: _______________________________Mobile no.: ___________________________________________ Name of IO / ICC: __________________________________________________________ Mobile no.: ________________________________
Name of ANM: ____________________________________________Mobile no.: ___________________________________________ Name of Supervisor with designation: _______________________________________ Mobile no.: ________________________________
Td Hep BBCGOPVRVVfIPVPCVPenta MR JE DPT__ Vit AMonth 1
 _____Month 2
 ______Month 3
 ______
PW InfantsD x 2E x 1 E x 1E x 5E x 3E x 3E x 3E x 3E x 2E x 2E x 2 E x 9Mode of 
Transport Name of person 
responsible with 
contact no.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V X
-Designated AEFI 
management center 
with contact no.
Day / Week no. 
W
# Type of HRA code: Migratory HRA: 1 = Slums with migration; 2 = Nomads; 3 - Brick kiln; 4 - Construction site; 5 - Other migratory high-risk areas (ﬁshermen villages, riverine areas with shifting populations, migrants in tea/coﬀee estates etc); Non-Migratory (Settled) HRA:  6A- Settled Slums (notiﬁed & non-notiﬁed); 6B- Hard to Reach Area; 6C- Areas under 
Vacant / temporarily vacant (More than 3 months) sub centres;  6D- Areas with Measles/Rubella outbreaks or cases of Diphtheria, Pertussis, Neonatal tetanus in last 3 years; 6E-Areas with vaccine hesitancy/ refusal; 6F-Other settled high-risk areasSubcenter / ANM Area: Session wise injection load and vaccine distribution plan 
Sl.
NoName and location of 
session site (exact 
location)                                     
If >1 session sites in a big 
village / urban area, 
mention separately
(Ref. column J of format SC-
6)Name/s of  village/sub 
village area /hamlet/ 
urban ward/ mohalla/ 
tola covered by the 
site with its sl no. from 
Form SC-1                          
(all areas in one cell 
separated by comma)Frequency of 
Sessions                 
(Once a 
quarter / 
once in 2 
months / 
num ber per 
month)Target for the 
session (add if 
multiple areas / 
tolas are clubbe d 
or divide in case 
of big village)Beneﬁciaries per session for each vaccine & vitamin A
Injection Load 
for the session 
(Td+BCG+ 
fIPV+PCV+Penta
+MR+JE+DPT)THESE COLUMNS TO BE FILLED AFTER APPROVAL OF PROPOSED PLAN BY MEDICAL OFFICER 
(Updated every 3 months/ quarterly)
Vaccine Distribution 

219Annexure 2.10
ANNEXURESDistrict/ Corporation:  ______________________________________ Block/ Urban: __________________________________ PHC/ UPHC - Planning Unit: __________________ SC/ANM area:  _________________________
Name of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: ________________________________ Mobile no.: ____________________________________ Name of IO / ICC:____________________________ Mobile No.____________________________
Name of ANM: _______________________________________ Mobile no.: ____________________________________ Name of Supervisor:___________________________ Mobile No.____________________________
TdHep 
BBCGOPVRVVfIPVPCVPenta MR JE DPT__ Vitamin AADS 
0.1 mlADS 0.5 
mlReconstitu
tion 
syringesParacet
amol 
syrupIFA 
tabletsZinc 
tablet / 
syrupORS 
packe
tRI / 
MCP 
cardOther 
logistics
F 
x1.11 
/10G 
x1.11 
/10H x 2 
/10I 
x1.11 
/20J X 
1.11K x 
1.11 
/25L 
x1.11 
/5M x 
1.11 
/10N X 
1.33
/5O x 
1.11
/10P X 
1.11 
/10(Ex 1ml) +  
{(E x 8) x 
2ml)} x 1.11(H+K) 
x 1.11(F+G+L+
M+N+O+
P)  x 1.11No. of 
BCG+ MR 
vials x 1.11
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Signature of ANM_______________________ Veriﬁed by Medical Oﬃcer (Signature):____________________________Calculations 
with help of 
columns in 
Format SC-7Sub Centre / ANM area: Estimation of vaccines & logistics per session                                     
   (To be used with format SC-7)Form SC-8
S.NoLocation 
of 
session 
siteEstimation of vaccine vials and logistics for each session (At least one vial of each vaccine in each session) This should be ﬁlled with the help of Form SC-7

220Annexure 2.11
Form SC-9
District/ Corporation:  ___________________________Block/ Urban: ___________________________________ PHC/ UPHC : ______________________________  SC/ ANM area: ________________________
Name & Mobile no. of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: __________________________________ Name & Mobile no. of IO / ICC:_______________________________________
Name & Mobile no. of ANM: _______________________________________ Name & Mobile no. of Sector Medical Oﬃcer:___________________________
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
1Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
2Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
3Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
4Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
5Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
1Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
2Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
3Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
4Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
5Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
1Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
2Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
3Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
4Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
5Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......Location : 
Time:          …....... to …......
Signature of ANM_______________________ Veriﬁed by Medical Oﬃcer (Signature):____________________________
Date of submission Date of veriﬁcationANM Workplan/ roster plan
Month WeekLocation of RI sessions with timingANNEXURES

221Annexure 2.12
Year: _______          Q1/2/3/4
Name of Village/ Hamlet/ Urban area
Name of ASHA
Name of AWW
Name of Inﬂuencers
Name of PRI/ULB representative
Activities M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3 M1 M2 M3
Mothers'/Fathers' Meetings 
Community/ MAS/ SHG Meeting 
Inﬂuencers Meeting 
VHSNC/UHSNC Meeting 
IPC sessions/counselling
Miking/Drum beating 
Rallies 
Celebrations/competitions/special days 
Banners
Posters
Leaﬂets
Information card/Bulawa parchi for 
parents
Wall paintings 
School Teachers' orientation/ 
coordination 
(Provide name of school &/or teacher 
with mobile no.)
Mosque/Temple/Church/Religious 
Institutions announcement
(Provide name of religious leader with 
mobile no.)
Others
Signature of ANM: Signature of MO:Name of the district/ corporation: Name of the facility-CHC/ PHC/ UPHC: Name of sub-center/health center: Name of ANM: Sub-Center/ ANM area level Quarterly Routine Immu nization Commu nication Plan Form SC-10
ANNEXURES

222Annexure 2.13
5-6 yrs (DPT 
Booster2)
1st std10 yrs (Td)
5th std16 yrs (Td)
10th std5-6 yrs (DPT 
Booster2)
(g X 1.11 / 10)Td
[(h+i)X1.11] / 10
a b c d e f g h i k l m n
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
Govt / Aided / Pvt
TOTALSession day, 
week & 
month  / 
mention dateName of 
ASHA/Mobilizer 
supporting session School immunization plan for DPT-2 and Td   - Sub-center/ ANM area
 District/ Corporation:_____________________________  Block/ Urban:___________________________ Sub center/ ANM area:____________________________   
PHC/UPHC:____________________________ 
Sl. 
No.Village / Urban 
areaName of School AﬃliationName of Principal 
/ Head MasterContact no. of 
School / Principal 
/ Head masterTarget beneﬁciaries per year Vaccine vials requiredForm-SC-11AANNEXURES

223
ANNEXURESAnnexure 2.14
AD syringes 
required
5-6 yrs 
(DPT Booster2) 
(Anganwadi 
children & School 
dropouts)10 -16 yrs 
(Td)
 (for school 
drop-outs)5-6 yrs (DPT 
Booster2)
(f X 1.11 / 10)Td
[gX1.11] / 10[(f+g) X 1.11] / 10)
a b c d e f g h i j k lName of 
ASHA/Mobilizer 
supporting 
session
TOTALCommunity based immunization plan for DPT Booster -2 and Td for school dropout children   - Sub-center/ ANM area 
 District/ Corporation:____________________  Block/ Urban:_____________________ Sub center/ ANM area:____________________   PHC/UPHC:________________
Sl. 
No.Village / 
Urban areaAddress of 
Anganwadi 
centreName of 
Anganwadi 
workerContact no. 
of 
Anganwadi 
worker Target beneﬁciaries per year Vaccine vials required
Session day, 
week & month  
/ mention dateForm-SC-11 B
ANNEXURES

224Annexure 2.15
Subcentre / ANM area wise workload and sessions' plan 
District/ Corporation:  ___________________________Block/ Urban: _______________________ PHC/ UPHC: _________________________________
Name of IO / ICC: ______________________________Mobile no.: _________________________ Name of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: ___________________ Mobile no.: __________________
PW Infants PW Infants
A B C D E F G I J
a/12 b/12
1
2
3   
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
TOTAL
Signature of Nodal Medical Oﬃcer - Immunization - ________________ Signature of Medical Oﬃcer I/C- ________________HS.No Name of Sub CentreTotal 
Population         Estimation of beneﬁciaries Session sites Type of RI Sessions
Annual Target 
(Based on actual 
headcount) by 
ASHA / AWW / Monthly Target Monthly 
Injection 
LoadNumber of 
Session SitesName of ANM/s Contact no./s Number of 
sessions per 
monthNo. of 
Fixed 
session 
sitesNo. of 
Outreach 
session 
sitesNo. of 
sessions 
through 
mobile 
teamNo. of sessions 
at Very/Hard to 
reach area, 
Tribal, Nomads 
etc.Form -PHC-1ANNEXURES

225Annexure 2.16
District/ Corporation:  _______________________________ Block/ Urban: ______________ PHC/ UPHC: __________________
Name of IO / ICC: _________________________ Mobile no.: _____________ Name of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: _______________ Mobile no.: _____________
S.No Name of person responsible Contact number MonthWeek no - 
1/2/3/4/5Day Site 1 Site 2 Site 3 Site 4 Site 5 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Signature of Nodal Medical Oﬃcer - Immunization - ________________ Signature of Cold chain handler - __________________ Signature of Medical Oﬃcer I/C- ________________Vaccine distribution plan (including alternate vaccine delivery) for PHC/ Urban PHC Form -PHC-2
ANNEXURES

226Annexure 2.17
District/ Corporation:  _______________________________Block/ Urban: _______________________________ PHC/ UPHC - Planning Unit: _______________________________
Name of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: __________________________________ Mobile no.: __________________________Name of IO / ICC:____________________________Mobile No.____________________________________Td
Hep B
BCG
OPV
RVV
fIPV
PCV
Penta 
MR
JE
DPT
__
Vitamin A
ADS 
0.1 ml
ADS 
0.5 ml
Reconstitution syringes
Paracetamol tablet/ syrup
IFA tablets
Zinc tablets
ORS packets
RI / MCP cards
Hub Cutter
Waste Disp Bags (Red, Blue, 
Yelllow, Black)
Anaphylaxis Kits
Other logistics
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Signature of Suprervisor_______________________ Veriﬁed by Medical Oﬃcer (Signature):____________________________Total requirement Monthly requirement of vaccines and logistics for PHC / Urban- PHC
S.No Name of SubcenterEstimation of vaccine vials and logistics for each Subcenter                                                                                 
Source ﬁgures from column totals from FORM 9 of each sub centreForm -PHC-3ANNEXURES

227Annexure 2.18
District/ Corporation:  _____________________________________ Block/ Urban: ________________________________________ PHC/ UPHC - Planning Unit: ______________________________________
Name & Mobile no. of Medical Oﬃcer I/C: ______________________________________________ Name & Mobile no. of IO / ICC:____________________________________
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Veriﬁed by Medical Oﬃcer Incharge (Signature with date):____________________________3
4
5Supervision plan for PHC / Urban- PHC    (Update every quarter)
Week Supervisor nameRI session sites, subcenter / ANM area name assigned for supervisory visits
1
2Form -PHC-4
ANNEXURES

228Annexure 2.19
Date: __/__/____
1-Shift vaccines in cold boxes with conditioned icepacks. Place thermometer inside the cold box.
2- Arrange shifting of vaccines to nearby PHC or other vaccine storage facility.
3-Contact DISTRTICT FOCAL PONIT for arranging cold chain space and arrange shifting.
1-  Shift ice-packs into cold boxes, if extra cold box is available after shifting of vaccines from the ILR.
2- Contact ice-factory:____________________________ , Mr __________________________ to freeze ice-packs.
Name Contact no E-mail Alternate contact noILRCONTINGENCY PLAN FOR VACCINE STORAGE 
PHC / UPHC:__________________________________
When to act: ILR/Deep Freezer breaks down OR Electricty failure for more than 18 hours
Who will act: : Name and number of Cold Chain 
Handler/s:______________________________________________________
What to do (Recomme nded actions)
State Cold chain Oﬃcer
Company direct:
Record details of breakdown in inventory register , UIP monthly PHC performance report, NCCMIS
Signature of Medical Oﬃcer                                                              Signature of Cold Chain HandlerDeep 
Freezer
In case of ILR /DF breakdown, IMME DIATELY INFORM:
Designation
Medical Oﬃcer :
DIO:
Discrict CC mechanic:Form -PHC-5ANNEXURES

229Annexure 2.20
PHC / UPHC___________________________Date: __/__/____
Name of the outsourced agency : _____________________________
Name and contact number of agency supervisor:_____________________________
Name and contact number of agency waste collection person:
Name and contact number of nodal medical oﬃcer :_______________________________________
Name and contact number of coordination personnel:_____________________________________
Name and contact number of ANM coordinator :____________________________________________
Location
Y/N
Y/N
Y/N
Signature   MO/IC :___________________________________         Signature Nodal Oﬃcer :______________________________________          BIO-MEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN
Identiﬁed RI session sharps recovery point 
Identiﬁed Disinfection corner/point
Sharps pit location BMW mechanisms at unitAt PHC/Urban planning unit:Form -PHC-6
ANNEXURES

230Annexure 2.21
Form PHC-7
Year Q1/2/3/4
Name of Block: Name of PHC/UPHC: Name of MO I/C:
M1 M2 M3
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & thematic area
No. & Category
No.
No. & Category
No. Mosque/Temple/Church/Religious Institutions announcements
Information card/Bulawa parchi for parents
School Teachers' orientation/coordination
Others (Specify)VHSNC/UHSNC Meeting 
IPC sessions/counselling
Miking/Drum Beating
Rallies
Celebrations/competitions/special days 
Note: This template is to be filled by the Medical Officer of the PHC/UPHC and submitted at Block level to the MOI/C for compilation at Block level.
The individual Sub-Centre level Quarterly RI Communication Plans are to be annexed with this Plan.PHC/UPHC Level Quarterly Routine Immunization Communication Plan 
Name of the district/ 
corporation:
Mid media 
activitiesBanners
Posters 
Leaflets 
Wall Paintings
Others (Specify)ActivitiesCOMPILATION OF SUBCENTRE LEVEL PLANS (Total for PHC/UPHC)
Social Mobilization 
activitiesMothers’s/Fathers' meeting
Community/ Influencers/ MAS/ SHG MeetingANNEXURES

231Annexure 2.22
Year Q1/2/3/4
Name of the District: Name of CHC:
Name of MO I/C: Name of BEE/BCM: 
M1 M2 M3
No. & Category
No. & Category
Responsible person
Date
No. of official groups
Member category
Plan
M1 M2 M3
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & thematic area
No. & Category
No.
No. & Category
No. 
Block l
Note: This template is to be filled by BEE/IEC focal at the Block level, reviewed by MOI/C and submitted to the person in-charge for IEC at the District for 
compilation at District level.
The individual PHC/UPHC level Quarterly RI Communication Plans are to be annexed with this Plan.School Teachers' orientation/coordination
Others (Specify)
Mid media activitiesBanners
Posters 
Leaflets 
Wall Paintings
Others (Specify)Social Mobilization 
activitiesMothers’s/Fathers' meeting
Community/ Influencers/ MAS/ SHG Meeting
VHSNC/UHSNC Meeting 
IPC sessions/counselling
Miking/Drum Beating
Rallies
Celebrations/competitions/special days 
Mosque/Temple/Church/Religious Institutions announcement
Information card/Bulawa parchi for parentsSocial MediaWhatsApp messages (members' category- CDPO, Education, 
IEC, PRI, Ward Members, MOs, ANM, ASHA etc.)
Other (Specify)
COMPILATION OF PHC/UPHC LEVEL PLANS (Total for Block)Block Level Quarterly Routine Immunization Communication Plan 
Activities at Block level
Advocacy MeetingsSensitization meeting with Block-level Officers (Panchayat, 
BDO, Ward Members, CDPO etc.) 
Coordination meeting with CSO/ NGOs/Religious leaders/ 
influencers at block level
Sensitization of media 
Any other (Specify)
ANNEXURES

232Annexure 2.23
Year Q1/2/3/4
Name of State: Name of the District:
Name of DIO: Name of IEC I/C: 
M1 M2 M3
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & Category
Responsible person
Identified local celebrity/brand ambassador for RI
Orientation of School principal/ Nodal persons No. & Category
No. of official groups
Member category
Plan
M1 M2 M3
Responsible person
Date
No. of official groups
Member category
Plan
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & Category
No. & thematic area
No. & Category
No.
No. & Category
No. 
Note: This template is to be filled by BEE/IEC focal at the District level, reviewed by DIO and submitted to the person in-charge for IEC at the State for 
compilation at State level.School Teachers' orientation/coordination
Others (Specify)
Mid media activitiesBanners
Posters 
Leaflets 
Wall Paintings
Others (Specify)Social Mobilization 
activitiesMothers’/Fathers' meeting
Community/ Influencers/ MAS/ SHG Meeting
VHSNC/UHSNC Meeting 
IPC sessions/counselling
Miking/Drum Beating
Rallies
Celebrations/competitions/special days 
Mosque/Temple/Church/Religious Institutions announcement
Information card/Bulawa parchi for parentsSensitization of media 
Any other (Specify)Coordination meeting with CSO/ NGOs/Religious leaders/ 
influencers at block levelNo. & Category
Social MediaWhatsApp messages (members' category- CDPO, Education, IEC, 
PRI, Ward Members, MOs, ANM, ASHA etc.)
Other (Specify)Advocacy MeetingsSensitization meeting with Block-level Officers (Panchayat, BDO, 
Ward Members, CDPO etc.) Other (Specify)
COMPILATION OF BLOCK LEVEL PLANS (Total for District)
No. & CategoryActivities at District level
Advocacy MeetingsSensitization meeting with Block-level Officers (Panchayat, BDO, 
Ward Members, CDPO etc.) 
Coordination meeting with CSO/NGOs/Religious leaders/ 
influencers at block level
Orientation of IMA/IAP/FOGSI members
Sensitization of media 
Any other (Specify)
Social MediaWhatsApp messages (members' category- CDPO, Education, IEC, 
PRI, Ward Members, MOs, ANM, ASHA etc.)Distrct Level Quarterly Routine Immunization Communication Plan ANNEXURES

233Annexure 3: Routine Immunization head count survey validation format 
 
Template for Validation of Head Count Survey  (HCS)  Routine Immunization 2024 
Date:   _ _ / _ _ / _ _   State/UT: ……………….…….…….  District: …………..………………..    Block/ Urban area:  …………………. ……..……… CHC/PHC/UPHC/Others: ……… ……………….……….  
Name of Planning unit: …………… ……………..  Subcenter/ ANM area:…………………….  Village/ Ward/ Mohalla:  …………………… Setting: Urban / Rural, If Urban, NUHM City: Yes/ No;  
Name of ANM/ Vaccinator…………..……………. Name of Monitor:  …………………………………………….; Organization: Govt / WHO / UNICEF / JSI / CH AI / Others (specify): ……………. …; 
Designation : ……………………..……;   
Is head count survey (HCS) conducted in this area (as per  survey plan ): Yes / No : if No  - inform MoIC, proceed to another area as per validation plan.   
Monitor to visit 5 households (HH) with at least one child due for at least one due vaccine and/or a pregnant woman and interact to elicit response .  Select HH should 
represent  the area . Find out from caregivers if surveyor/team has visited for HCS. Meet surveyor and validat e the data in HCS format. Ensure data entry in ODK tool same day.   
No. Monitoring and validation details: HH-1 HH-2 HH-3 HH-4 HH-5 
1 a. Ask family member if surveyor/team visited HH for HCS?  Yes / No  Yes / No  Yes / No  Yes / No  Yes /  No 
b. If visited, date surveyor visited this HH (from wall / family member, else NA)  __ / __/ __ / NA  __ / __/ __; UM  __ / __/ __; UM  __ / __/ __; UM  __ / __/ __; UM  
c. No. marked for this HH (From wall of HH / else consider unmarked HH (UM)  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  ______ / UM  
2 a. Name of the head of family       
b. Mobile/landline contact number       
3 
Pregnant 
woman  a. Is there a pregnant woman found in this HH? (Select only 1 if >1)?  Y / N  Y / N  Y / N  Y / N  Y / N 
b. Name of the pregnant woman       
c. Is this PW identified in HCS  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  Y / N / NA  
4 
Children <1 year                                       
(0-11 months)  a. No. of children found in this HH by monitor as on day of HCS?       
b. No. of children found due for any vaccine  dose as on day of HCS       
c. Name(s) of children  due for any vaccine (b) to validat e with HCS format       
d. No. of children due for any vaccine but missed (c) in HCS format       
e. Name(s) of children  due for any vaccine but missed (d) in HCS format       
f. No. of children 2-11 months due for Penta -1 as on day of HCS       
g. Name(s) of children (f) due for Penta -1 for validation with HCS format       
h. No. of children due for Penta -1 but missed (g) in HCS format       
i. Name(s) of children (h) due for Penta -1 missed in HCS format       
  
 
No. Monitoring and  validatio n details: HH-1 HH-2 HH-3 HH-4 HH-5 
5 
Children 1 -2 years ( 12-23 months) a. No. of children  (12-23 months) in this HH  as on day of HCS       
b. No. of children who have not received Pentavalent-1 within  1st year of 
age (Zero  dose) as on day of HCS   
(Even if the  child has received DPT1)      
c. Name(s) of ZERO dose children (b) t o validate  with HCS format      
d. No. of children due (c) for DPT-1       
e. Na me(s) of children (d) d ue for DPT-1 to validate  with HCS  format      
f. No. of children ( e) due for DPT1 but missed in  HCS  format      
g. Name(s) of children ( f) due for DPT-1 but missed  in HCS fo rmat      
h. No. of children ( 16-23 M) found du e for DPT booster-1 as on day of HCS       
i. Name(s) of children due  for DPT booster-1 (h) to validate with HCS 
format      
j. No. of children due for DPT booster-1 (i) but missed in HCS  format      
k. Name(s) of children due for DPT booster-1 (j) but missed in  HCS  format      
6 
Children 2 -5 
                                       sraey
(24-59 
months) a. No. of children f ound in t his HH  by mon itor as on day of HCS       
b. No. of children f ound du e for MR-1/MR 2 as on day of HCS   MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  MR1: MR2:  
c. Name(s) of childre n due (b) fo r MR1/MR2  MR1: MR1: MR1: MR1: MR1: 
MR2: MR2: MR2: MR2: MR2: 
d. No. of children due (c) for MR1/MR2 but missed in  HCS MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: MR1: MR2: 
 
7 Refusal Has this chi ld missed  any due dose due to refusal  / AEFI app rehe nsion? Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No 
 
Interacti on with the surveyor/team: Met surveyor/team?  Yes / No (If no – skip Q 8-  a, b, c and d) 
8 a. Who  has done HCS ?         ASHA / AWW / ANM / Link worker / Others  
b. Did the surveyor receive train ing prior to HCS?  Yes / No      
c. No. of houses planned b y the team per day:  i) less than  25 ii) 25-50 iii) 50 - 100 iv) ≥ 100 
d. Has the s urveyor (team )` used stand ardized HCS format?   Yes / No 
 
Assess ment b y the mon itor:  
9 a. Has surv eyor missed  children due for one or more vaccin es in ≥2 HH?  Y / N / NA (if no t met with sur veyor/team)  
b. No. of cluster of ≥3 consecutiv e HH n ot visited by surveyor/team (within 5 HH monitored and  in th e area  whil e walk through) ? ______ _  
 
□ Recommend repeat survey if: 1). ≥ 3 consecutiv e HH n ot visited for surv ey AND/OR 2). ≥ 2 HH have missed children d ue for any du e vaccine dose(s ) in survey           
ANNEXURES

234ANNEXURES
Annexure 4: Checklists for Preventive Maintenance of cold-chain equipment
Daily Preventive Maintenenace checklist for ILR and DF/Date
1 Exterior of CCE is clean
2 CCE are placed firmly on the floor
3 CCE are properly leveled
4 Sides are atleast 10cm away from any wall or object
5 CCE are away from direct sunlight
6 The room is well ventilated
7 Lid is kept locked
8 Keys kept at easily available place
9 Lid seals properly without gap
10 Lid seal is clean
11 Ice packs are in proper position (for DF only)
12 Ice packs filled to proper level (no leak)
13 Thickness of frost formation is not more than 5 mm
14 Vaccines preserved in neat rows
15 There is space between rows of vaccine for air circulation
16 Freeze sensitive vaccines are kept in upper part basket and not touching any cooling surface (for ILRs only)
17 Separate thermometer kept among the vaccine
33 Temperature recorded is minimum twice a day
18 Reading of thermometer is within desire temp. range.
22 Voltage stabilizer connected
23 Input voltage reading  ....................................... volts
24 Output voltage reading… .................................... volts
25 Plug of voltage stabilizer fits properly and not loose on the power socket
26 Connections to voltage stabilizer proper and not loose
27 Electrical connections are proper (visual checks)
28 No abnormal voice
Signature of Vaccine & Cold-chain Handler
Signature of MOI/C
*(If not, adjust thermostat to obtain steady temperature within specified limits, (Only if user is fully aware of setting procedure & confident about), or otherwise contact cold-chain Technician.)ANNEXURES

235Preventive Maintenance checklist for ILR and DF (Weekly)
Weekly Preventive Maintenenace checklist for ILR and DF 1st week 2nd week 3rd week 4th week
1 Open the unit and wipe the area over the rubber gasket on the cover of the unit 
and the area where it meets the main body when the cover is closed – with a 
clean wet cloth. (If done put tick √ )
2 Check door seal, door fitting, position of the equipment on the floor, and clean 
the gasket and adjust position if required (If done put tick √ )
3 Check lock and key operation (If done put tick √ )
4 Visual inspection of Electrical wiring appearance (If done put tick √ )
5 Condition of the cord & plug (If done put tick √ )
6 Stabilizer is working properly & giving proper output voltage (If done put tick √ )
7 Power supply is available up to CCE (If done put tick √ )
8 Check the units for level of frost around the inner side of the walls and especially 
on the top where the cover meets the body of equipment. (If done put tick √ )
Signature of Vaccine & Cold-chain Handler
Signature of MOI/C
(If the frost is more than 5 mm thick on the walls or 1mm thick on the top area than the unit needs to be defrosted. See process for defrosting below)
ANNEXURES

236Annexure 5: Formats for Vaccine stock and distribution registers
Annexure 5.1: Vaccine Stock register formats
ANNEXURES

237Annexure 5.2 Vaccine distribution register formats
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
RVV DropperIssueReturn ReturnIssueReturnIssueReturnIssueReturn IssueReturn 
(un-
used)Issue Issue IssueReturn 
(un-
used)IssueReturnDate:
Issue and Return of Open Vaccine Vials (VVM Status-Usable)
MR Diluent 
Doses0.1ml 0.5 ml 5 ml
IssueReturn 
(un-
used)Issue Return Issue ReturnbOPV vialsfIPV vials DPT vials RVV Dropper
Issue ReturnPentavalent 
vialsJE Doses
Issue Return IssueTd DosesPentavalent 
DosesBCG DosesBCG Diluent 
DosesMR Doses JenVac vials
IssueReturn Return Issue Return Vaccine Distribution Register for Immunisation Session
Name of th e CHC/PHC/PPC: 
Issue ReturnbOPV 
DropperSyringes
Red and 
Black 
Plastic 
Bags 
(Yes/No)S.NoNam e of th e Sub-
centre/UHP /HF- Sessi on sitebOPV Doses fIPV Doses DPT Doses Hep-B Doses Hep-B vials Td vials PCV vials RVV Doses PCV Doses
Return IssueReturn Issue ReturnName of th e person receiving return vaccines: Name of th e person distributing the vaccines: Type of th e session (RI/ SIW/Campaign/Others):
Issue and Return of Un-opened Vaccine Vials (VVM Status-Usable) 
Return Issue Return Issue Return Issue Return Issue Return Issue Return Issue
PCV doses BCG DosesBCG Diluent 
Doses0.1ml 0.5 ml 5 ml JenVac Doses MR DosesMR Diluent 
DosesRVV DosesTotal
DPT Doses Hep-B Doses Td DosesPentavalent 
DosesNet Utilised = (Total Issued Doses - 
Total Returned Doses)bOPV Doses fIPV DosesbOPV 
Dropper
ANNEXURES

238Annexure 5.3 Indent and supply formats
ANNEXURES

239AFTER IMMUNIZATION LET THE PARENTS OR GUARDIANS WAIT FOR 30 MINUTES.
Suspect* Anaphylaxis in a case with following symptoms and signs.
Manage anaphylaxisEariy onset (within few minutes to 6 hours) & rapid progression of > =1 signs &
symptoms of any of the two systems (Respiratory, cardiovascular and dermatological 
/ mucosal)
Respiratory:
• Swelling of tongue, lip, throat, uvula, larynx
• Diﬀiculty in breathing
• Stridor (harsh vibrating sounds during breathing)
• Wheezing (breathing with whistling or rattling sound in the chest)
• Cyanosis ( (bluish discoloration of arms and legs. tongue, ears, lips, etc.)
• Grunting (noisy breathing)
Cardiovascular:
• Decreased level/loss of consciousness (fainting, dizziness)
• Law blood pressure ( measured hypotension)
• Tachycardia (increased heart rate, palpitation)
Dermatological or mucosal:
• Generalized urticaria (raised red skin lesion. rash with itching)
• Generalized erythema (redness of skin)
•  Local or generalized Angioedema-itchy/ painful swelling of subcutaneous tissues
 such as upper eyelids, lips, tongue, face, etc.
• Generalized pruritus (itching) with skin rash
Other signs/ symptoms: anxiety, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting and
sneezing or rhinorrhea.
• Reassure patient, parents / relatives
• Immediately administer one dose of injection Adrenaline by deep IM route
• Seek help to inuuediately arrange for ambulance to transport the patient to
 the nearest health facility (PHC/ CHC/ District Hospital/ Civil Hospital)
• Do not leave the patient alone
• If patient is conscious, he/ she should be kept in supine position with lower
 Iimbs raised higher than head
• If patient is unconscious he/ she sbould be kept in le/f_t lateral position
Refer to higher center
• Call for ambulance
• Inform MO about the case before arriving at the health facility for timely management
• Document suspected anapbylazis on immunization card in block letters against   
 vaccines administeredStep 1: 
Assess Case
Step 2: 
Administer 
one dose of 
adrenaline 
deep IM
Step 4: 
Docoment
suspected 
anaphylaxisStep 3: Refer 
immediately
*Many of the initial signs and symptoms are similar in both mild allergic reactions / anaphylaxis. AMN may administer a single dose of 
adrenaline injection at the first sign or symptom suggestive of allergy or anaphylaxis.Flow Chart: Initial management of Anaphylaxis by ANMAnnexure 6
ANNEXURES

240Annexure 7: Formats used during Adverse Event Following Immunization 
(AEFI)– Case Reporting Form (CRF) and AEFI register
 
Annexure 7.1: Case Reporting Form (CRF)ANNEXURES

241 
ANNEXURES

242Annexure 7.2: AEFI Register (to be kept at PHC/cold-chain point/sector or block PHC/facility 
conducting vaccination) (to be filled by ANMs once a week)
 
ANNEXURES

243Annexure 7.3: Assessment of AEFIs recorded at the Planning unit level (Format to be shared 
in the first week of every month to DIO) To be filled by MO in charge
 
ANNEXURES

244Annexure 8: Routine Immunization Tally sheetDate of session:   Session site address: _______________  Village: ________________________________ Setting: Urban/ Rural HRA (Y/N)__________ If yes, specify code __________________________
Block/ Urban area: __________________________________________                                                           Planning unit (PHC/UPHC/CHC): __________________________________________    Sub center: ________________________________
Name of ANM: ________________________________________________ Name of mobilizer(s): ________________________________________________________Td-1
Td-2
Td- Booster
BCG
OPV-0
Hep. B birth dose
OPV-1
Penta 1
RVV-1
fIPV-1
PCV-1
OPV -2
Penta 2
RVV-2
OPV-3
Penta-3
RVV-3
fIPV-2
PCV-2
MR-1 (9-11 months)
MR-1 (>12 months- 5 yrs)
fIPV-3
PCV-Booster
JE-1#
Vit A-1
●DPT-1
●DPT-2
●DPT-3
OPV-Booster
DPT- 1st Booster
MR-2 (16-24 months)
MR-2 (>24 months - 5yrs)
JE-2#
Vit A-2
 
  
Total < 1 year Male
< 1 year Female
Total > 1 year Male
> 1 year Female
Prepare three copies of this form (1 for ANM, 1 for mobilizer (ASHA/ Link worker) and other for the Block/ Planning unit)                                               
               Signature of ANM/ Vaccinator                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Signature of Supervisor/ Medical Oﬃcer                                                    9 months to <12 months
●       Children less than 1 year shoul d not be given DPT, start schedule with pentavalent vaccine only.
●       As per guidelines, subsequent doses of the Pentavalent vaccine can be given to a child with more than one year of age only if the child has started with the Pentavalent vaccination within one year. Give subsequent dose in the next possible contact. Do not start Pentavalent 
vaccination beyond one year of age.
●       Children more than 1 year of age coming to the session site for the ﬁrst time (without  any vaccination) shoul d be given DPT and not the pentavalent vaccine. Other missed vaccination shoul d be given as per guidelines.
*    Age of child shoul d be documented in completed months; age of pregnant woman shoul d be documented in completed years
#    Record vaccination wherever is applicable (as JE vaccine is applicable in JE endemic districts only)AEFI Reporting
No. of Adrenaline doses used (if any)
No. of hospitalized AEFI cases (if any)Pregnant 
WomenChildren2 to 5 YearsChildren vaccinated for the ﬁrst time in life
Up to 2 Year1 to <2 YearsTotalFor ANMS. No
Name of beneﬁciaryFather/ husband 
name
Age*
Sex
MCP Card no. / U-WIN ref. no. 
(If not registered in UWIN register)
Full immunization achieved (Y/N)TICK (√)  THE BOX FOR EACH VACCINE 
GIVEN TO THE BENEFICIARY
Complete immunization achieved 
(Y/N)
DPT-2nd Booster 
(5-6 years)Tally sheet for Routine Immunization session
Tab. Zinc 
If not vaccinated reason
(mention the code)ORS packetsVaccines due for this session
Female TotalFull immunization Achieved Summary
Age MaleTICK (√) THE BOX FOR EACH VACCINE GIVEN TO THE BENEFICIARY Pregnant 
WomenWhether child vaccinated for the 
ﬁrst time in life (Y/N)
M F TUp to 1 Year
M F
Pregnant 
WomenChildren Children ChildrenReason for beneﬁciaries not  vaccinated
R3 - Refused R4 - Already Vaccinated in 
other RI session/ in private
Pregnant 
WomenR5 - Fear of AEFI Others
Pregnant Women ChildrenPregnant 
WomenChildrenR1 - House locked/ Out of 
village/ WardR2 - Sick
Pregnant 
WomenTotal no of beneﬁciaries that 
could not be vaccinated
ChildrenPregnant 
WomenTotal Children vaccinated
No. of target Pregnant Women for the session 
(as per due list)
Total Pregnant Women vaccinatedTAge of child
Sex of child
No. of target children for the session 
(as per due list)T M F T M F
Details of vaccine and logistic
Received
Utilized
ReturnedBCG1 to 2 Years 2 to 5 Years Grand Total 
0.5 ML Syringe Mixing Syringe 5 ML IPV PCV Td JE# OPV DPT BCG Diluent MR MR Diluent Pentavalent RVV 0.1 ML SyringeANNEXURES

245Annexure 9: Routine Immunization Supervision and monitoring formats
 
 
Routine Immunization  Session Site Monitoring Format - 2023  
Encircle applicable options. For ( *) marked questions multiple responses may be applicable  
State/UT: …………………..…..…….…….  District: …………..………………..    Date:   _ _ / _ _ / _ _   Type of monitoring: RI / SIW / Others  (specify) …………….  ……………….           Monitoring time: _ _ :  _ _ to _ _ :  _ _    
Block/ Urban area:……………… ……..……… CHC /PHC/UPHC /Others : ……………… …….  Planning unit: ……………………… Subcenter/ ANM area:……………… ……… ….  Village/ Ward/ Mohalla:………… ……. …………  
Setting: Urban/ Rural, If Urban, NUHM City: Y es/ No ;  Name of ANM / Vaccinator …………..………………….   Name of Session site: ……………… …..……….  
Session type: a. Fixed / Outreach / Mobile/ Vaccination on demand;   b.. Govt./ Pvt;  c. *HRA#: Yes/ No, If Yes, mention code :… … , ……. , ………  Is there an ongoing measles outbreak in this area? Yes / No  
Name of Monitor (s):  …………… …………………………………… …………. ; Organization: Govt  / WHO / UNICEF  / JSI / CHAI / Others (specify): …… …………. ……… …; Designation: ……………………..……;  
Name of Monitor(s):  …………………………………………………………….; Organization: Govt / WHO / UNICEF / JSI / CHAI / Others (specify): ……………….………… ; Designation: ……………………. .……;  
 
 
# Codes for HRA*: 1: Slum with migration 2: Nomads 3: Brick kiln 4: Construction site 5: Other migratory sites 6A: Settled Slum 6B: Hard to Reach areas 6C: Vacant Subcenter 6D: VPD outbreak areas 6E: Vaccine hesitancy 6F: Others  (Specify): …………………..  
1 Is planned 
session found 
held at the time 
of visit?  Yes / No  * If no-reason(s)  a. Session closed early b. ANM didn’t report at the session c. Vaccine / logistics not available d. ANM and Vaccin e/ logistics not available e. Others………………..…  
If session found ‘not held’ skip to Q 31-33 as applicable, and plan to conduct house -to-house monitoring in th is area after the stipulated session closure time same day /at the earliest  
If yes  a. Is the session being held at same location as per micro -plan?   Yes / No           b. Is the vaccinator same as per micro -plan? Yes / No   
 
UWIN portal  use: Yes / No / NA – Not yet started in the state/district  
2 a. Is this session site registered on UWIN?  Yes / No / NA  b. Is vaccinator registered on UWIN? Yes / No / NA  c. Is the current session registered and conducted on UWIN Yes / No / NA  
d. Whether e -Vaccination certificate is generated after administering vaccine?      Yes / No / NA 
 
Monitor observed ANM vaccinating at least 1 child? Yes / No [If no, skip to Q 11]  
3 Is ANM administering vaccines in correct sequence per operational guidelines?   Yes / No (6-14 weeks: bOPV, RVV, BCG, fIPV, PCV, Penta); (≥9 months: Vit -A, fIPV, MR, PCV, JE); (≥16 months: Vit -A, OPV, MR, DPT , JE) 
4* Are safe injection practices followed ? Yes / No; If No, select: a. not cutting syringe hub immediately after use b. recapping  of needle  c. touching the needle  during preparation  /administration  d. pre -filling of syringe  
5 Is ANM providing 4 key messages [Vaccine given for protecting which disease; their side effects & how to manage, safe keep of  the card, & when and where is next visit]                                                                All 4 messages / Some mes sages / None  
6 6A: ANM asking caregivers to wait with child for 30 min after vaccination?  Y/ N  6B: Is paracetamol syrup provided, to be used if child develop s fever following vaccination?  Y / N / Paracetamol not available  
7 Is ANM updating MCP/ RI card /UWIN after vaccinating each child?  a. MCP/ RI card: Yes / No  b. UWIN portal: Yes / No / NA – Not yet started in the state/district  c. State initiated portal : Yes / No / NA  
 
8 Who delivered vaccine/logistics at the session site?  a. Alternate Vaccine Delivery (AVD) b.  ANM / Vaccinator c. ASHA d. AWW e. Supervisor f. others g. Not applicable as session site is a CCP  
9 a. Name of cold chain point (CCP) supplying vaccines/ logistics to this session site: ……………………………; b. Is the travel time from CCP to this session site more than 1 hour: Yes / No  
10 10A. Is Mahila Arogya Samiti (MAS) 
for NUHM City constituted?             
(Check with ANM / ASHA / mobilizer)  Yes / No / NA  10B. Mobilizer/s found working at the session  
a. ASHA: Yes / No / NA   b. AWW: Yes / No / NA  c. Link worker: Yes / No / NA         
d. MAS: Yes / No / NA e. Others (specify): _____________  10C. Any local Influencer identified and supporting RI in ongoing MR 
outbreak area? Yes / No / NA ; If Yes, Influe ncer is/are:  
a. religious  influencer b. PRI member c. Local d octor d. Others……... … 
 
Is the session being held at District hospital, Medical College, Block HQ PHC, CHC etc. [Which has no well-defined  catchment area] Yes  / No;  
If yes , SKIP Q11 and 12, If “No” – continue with Q11 onwards  
11 Is Head Count Survey (HCS) done for this session area?  Y / N  If yes, HCS record available?  Y / N  If yes, when was HCS done? a. within 6 months b. within 6 -12 months c. More than 1  year back  
12 Is updated due list available with mobilizers?  Yes / No  If yes, does the list have beneficiaries from:   0 to <2 Years: Y / N   2 – 5 years children missed MR1/MR2: Y / N   Pregnant woman: Y / N   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Annexure 9.1
ANNEXURES

246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13 Status of ice pa cks in th e vaccine carrier (regular or freeze free vaccine ca rrier) a. Hard frozen b. Ice-packs ha ve Ice and wat er c. Ice-packs ha ve only wate r  
14* Encircle vac cine/ diluen t available  at session  : BCG / BCG Diluent / bOPV / I PV / RVV - VVM  on Cap /  RVV - VVM  on Label / Pentavalent / DPT / PCV / MR / M R Diluent / JE /Td  
15* Does ALL o pened vials ha ve date and time mentioned on them ?  Yes / No / NA; If no , mention vaccine(s): ………… …..……; ……… ………;  …….……….……………; ……… ………………..  
16* Wheth er ALL reconstitute d vaccines (BCG / M R) are within  4 hours of reconstitutio n?   Yes / No / NA:   If no, mention vaccine( s) ……… ……………… ………; ……… ……………… ………. ………;  
 
17* Any issue  with condition  of 
vaccine / diluent  identified?                      Yes / No ; If yes, sele ct option 
and *mention vaccine (s) a. Frozen …… ..……… ……;  b . VVM in unusable sta ge ……… ..……….; c. Dam aged label: .. ……..………..; d . Dam aged glass/sep tum………….. …...;   
e. Beyond expiry date ……….;  f. Beyond 28 days of opening (for vaccine s under open vial policy) …………;  g. Other conditions (specify) .………. ….; 
 
18* Which logist ics ar e NOT available ?  AD syringes : a. 0.1 ml ; b. 0. 5 ml; c. Sufficient 5 ml reconstitutio n.   d. Vit-A solut ion; e. Spoon for Vit-A; f. ORS ; g. Zinc tab/syr ; h. Blank MCP cards; i. All logistics ar e available  
Bio-medical wa ste and AEFI management                                [If Red/Bl ack b ag not available  then NA for 19C and 19D ] 
 
19 19A. Is working h ub-cutter with white/blue puncture & tam per proof container available?  Yes / No;  19B: Hub  cutter with cut hubs + needle and broken vial/ampo ule being sent for dispo sal? Yes / No    
19C. ANM segregating i). plastic portion of syringe /used empty vial into red bag – Y / N / NA; ii). Wrapper/ needle cap  into black ba g: Y / N / NA 19D. Red/ Black ba gs with co ntents sent for dispo sal? Yes / No/ NA 
20 Is Anaphylaxis kit avai lable?  Yes / No    if yes, a. Adrenaline within e xpiry date: Y / N       b. Adrenaline dose ch art: Y / N    c.  Tuberculin/In sulin syringe with d etachable needle: Y / N  
21 Any AEFI management center ta gged with th is sess ion:  Yes / No / Not awar e; If yes, mention details: ………… ……… ……… ……… ………… ……… ……… ……… …… 
 
Interaction  with A NM / mobilizers 
22* Did an y sup ervisor  visit the  sessi on today? Yes / No, If yes; select o ption(s): a. Medical Officer  b. Health  Supervisor   c. Commun ity Health  Officer (CHO)  d. Distr ict level Officials e.  Others: ………..… … 
23 Training  status of ANM on Immunization  Hand book for Health  Workers    a. Trained more than 3 years back b. Trained within  last 3  years   c. never trained 
24 24A. BRIDGE training  received b y a. ANM b. ASHA c. AWW d. No ne 24B. ANM trained on RISE module   Yes / No / Not a pplicable ( RISE training  not started in the state/district) 
 
Num ber of caregivers interviewed : 1 / 2 / Non e [If “None ” SKIP Q 25- 27] Caregiver 1 Caregiver 2 
25* Who asked  to bring child to  this session ? a. ASHA b. AWW c. ANM d. MAS e.  Link worker f. ULB/PRI g. Religious leader h. Influencer   i. Self  j.Others.…..... a / b / c / d / e / f / g / h / I / j a / b / c / d / e / f / g / h / I / j 
26* What wou ld you  do if the vaccina ted child d evelops f ever / pain?  a. Give P aracetamol b. contact Health worker c. Other (specify)…….…  d . Not awar e  a / b / c……………… / d a / b / c……………… / d 
27 When should you bring the child for next vaccina tion? (Monitor to assess a nd select  wheth er the caregiver’s response is Cor rect / Incorrect) Correct / In correct Correct / In correct 
 
Interview wi th ASHA / LINK worker: ASHA interviewed  - Yes / No /  NA [If No or  NA, skip Q28] 
28* ASHA awar e of which of  the following 
incen tives in RI pr ogramme?   a. Line listing ( HCS) of HH & beneficiar ies      b. Due  list preparation and monthly u pdation   c. M obilization  of childr en    d. Full Im munization  with 1st year vaccine s     
e. Com plete Immun ization  with 2nd year vaccine s   f. For DPT booster dose-II at five years   g. Not a ware of any ince ntive    
29 Is the LINK worker awar e of incentive for mobilization  of children Yes / No / Not a pplicable / Not m et 
 
30* Any RI related IEC material disp layed at session site ?  Yes / No  If yes; sele ct   a. Poster     b. Banner     c. Wall pa inting     d. Nation al Im munization  sche dule in local language    e. Others (Specify): ………… 
 
Meet Medical Officer  to asce rtain reason(s) for session  not held [SKIP Q31-33 if session  was held] 
31 Why A NM was no t available at session site ? a. On leave     b. Vacant post        c. Assigne d other wor k    d. Others (specify) ……….. ……   
32 Are you aware of hired vaccina tor and their incen tives?  Yes / No 
33 Reaso n for non-availability of vaccines/lo gistic s?     a. Not issue d   b. Not p icked up    c. Not  delivered                d. Others (specify) ………… ….    
Notes:  ANNEXURES

247Annexure 9.2
 Routine Immunization House to House Monitoring Format  - 2023  
Monitor to follow “Standard Operating Procedure” (SOP) and refer “Ready Reckoner” during monitoring. Encircle appropriate options. For ( *) marked questions multiple responses are allowed  
State/U T: …………………..… ……… ..…….…….…        District: …………..………………..     Date:   _ _ / _ _ / _ _        Type of monitoring: RI / SIW / Others (specify) ……………………..   Monitoring time: _ _ :  _ _ to _ _ :  _ _    
Block/ Urban area: ………………… ……    CHC/ PHC/UPHC /Others :…………… …… .………  Planning unit: ……………..……..      Subcenter/ ANM area :………………… ..…………   Session site/s for this area:……………………..   
Village/ Ward/ Mohalla:………… ……… ……   Setting: Urban / Rural ; HRA: Yes/ No ; $If Yes, mention code : $ 1/ 2/ 3  / 4/ 5  / 6A  / 6B  / 6C  / 6D  / 6E / 6F; Is there an ongoing measles outbreak in this area? Yes / No  
Name of Monitor (s):  1) ……………… …….. ………… ; 2) …………………………     Organization: Govt/ WHO / UNICEF/ JSI / CHAI / Others (specify): ……… ……… ; ……….……  Designation (s): ………… ………… ; ……… ……..…  
# Codes for HRA: 1: Slum  with migration  2: Nomads  3: Brick kiln  4: Construction site  5: Other migratory sites  6A: Settled Slum   6B: Hard to Reac h areas    6C:Vacant Subcenter    6D: VPD outbreak areas    6E: Vaccine hesitancy  6F: Others  
 
 
 Monitor to visit 10 househo lds (HH)  7 HH for 7 children 0 -23 months (up to 2 years)   3 HH for 3 children 24 -59 months (2 to 5  years ) 
Details of child and vaccination status  in monitored Households  HH-1 HH- 2 HH-3 HH-4 HH-5 HH-6 HH-7 HH-1 HH-2 HH-3 Details of sleeted child  1a Name  of the selected child   
          
1b Name of the Father/Mother of the child              
1c Person providing information  
[Mother = M; Father = F, Grandparents = G , Other s = O ]  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  M / F / G / O  
1d Religion ( H=Hindu , M=Muslim, C= Christian , O=Others)  H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O  H  / M / C / O  H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O H  / M / C / O 
1e Gender of the child: M=Male , F=Female, O = Other  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  M / F / O  
1f Place of delivery:  G = Govt Hospital, P = Private Hospital, H = Home  G / P / H  G / P / H G / P / H  G / P / H  G / P / H  G / P / H  G / P / H  G / P / H  G / P / H  G / P / H  
1g Date of birth (dd/mm/yy). [if not known, write NA]            
1h Age in completed months            
$1i Source of information on vaccination status  
MCP/RI Card = C, Recall  = R ; e-Vaccination certificate  = eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC C / R / eVC 
Write dates  (dd/mm/yy)  for each vaccine received  if MCP  /RI / eVC is available . In case  of recall w rite Yes / No .  Mention “NA” for vaccine if child is not due for vaccine in view of age or the vaccine has not been /was not introduced in the district or the  child was  not eligible  At birth  2a Hep-B birth dose Administered within 24 hours of birth           
2b  bOPV -0 dose as early as possible, within 15 days of birth            
2c  BCG  at birth, within 1 year of age              At 6 w eeks  3a  bOPV -1 at 6 weeks, can be given up to 5 years of age             
3b  RVV-1 at 6 weeks, not to st art after 1 year of age            
3c  fIPV-1 at 6 weeks, not to start after 1 year of age            
3d PCV 1 at 6 weeks, not to start after 1 year of age            
3e Pentavalent -1 at 6 w eeks (not to start after 1 year of age )           
3f DPT-1 (can be given if Penta -1 not started within 1 year of age )           At 10 w eeks 4a bOPV -2 at 10 weeks            
4b RVV-2 at 10 weeks            
4c Pentavalent -2 at 10 weeks            
4d DPT-2 (If DPT is initiated, else NA)            At 14 w eeks 5a bOPV-3 at 14 weeks            
5b RVV-3 at 14 weeks             
5c fIPV-2 at 14 weeks             
5d PCV2 at 14 weeks            
5e Penta valent -3 at 14 week s           
5f DPT-3 (If DPT is initiated, else NA)            
ANNEXURES

248Annexure 10.1: Format to capture HRA data at Sub center/ ANM area/ PHC/ UPHC/ Block/ Urban area/ District
 
Annexure 10.2: Format for field validation of sites with migratory population
(0-1 
years)(1-2 
years)(2-5
years)Y / NIf Yes then  
details (day, 
week)
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O
1Y / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N
2Y / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N / Newly 
identifiedY / N
1 2 3 4 5
Signature of validator:__________________________________ Total Reestimated 0-5 yr childrenSl. 
No
.Name of the site & 
LocationType of 
HRA 
(1-5)Date Field 
Validation 
DoneWhether 
the site 
existsRe-
estimated 
PopulationRe-
Estimated 
Households
Reestimated 0-1 yr children
Reestimated 1-2 yr children
Reestimated 2-5 yr childrenNo. of sites / Areas
Reestimated Population
Reestimated householdsMigratory HRA Total Migratory HRA: 1-Slum with migration;, 2-Nommads;, 3-Brick Kilns; 4-Constructions; 5-other 
migratory HRA;PField Validation of Sites with Migratory populations
Name of District/ Corporation:____________________Block/Urban area: _____________________________ PHC/ UPHC:_______________________________ Sub Centre:__________________________
Name of the person conducting Field Validation:_____________________________________ Designation:_______________________________________________
Re-Estimated 
Beneficiaries Whether RI services 
planned using mobile 
team / special team?Whether 
reesimate 
approximately 
match survey 
dataWhere are they Migrated 
from?
(area, block, district, State)Name of the 
ANM/CHO 
responsible 
for areaName of the 
Mobilizer 
responsible for 
areaForm: HRA-2ANNEXURES

249Annexure 11. Agenda for two days RI training for Health workers
Time Topic
Day 1
09:00-09:15 Registration
09:15-09:30 Welcome and introduction of participants
09.30- 09:45 Pre-test
09.45-10:05 Introduction
10:05-10:30 Responsibilities of HWs in RI 
10:30-10:50 Diseases prevented by vaccination
10:50-11:20 National Immunization Schedule and FAQs 
11:20-11:30 TEA BREAK
11:30-13:15 Microplanning for immunization
13:15-14:00 LUNCH
14:00-15:00 Managing the cold-chain and the vaccine carrier 
15:00-15:30 Safe injections and waste disposal
15:30-16:00 Adverse events following immunization
16.00-17:00 Conducting RI session
17:00–17:30 Preparation for the field visit and evaluation of the day
Day 2
08:00-12:00Field visit to immunization session site followed by discussion on 
observations
12:30-13:15 Records, reports and use of data for action 
13:15-14:00 LUNCH
14:00-15:00 U-WIN
15:00-16:00 Communication
16:00–16:30 Surveillance of VPDs
16:30-16:45 Post test
16:30-17:15 Distribution of certificates and conclusion
ANNEXURES

250Notes

251

252
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION MANUAL
FOR HEALTH WORKERS
2024